r.:,.

5

L.

it:na

T:ZOENIOAL NOTES
NATIONAL ADVISOnY COMHITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

/

No .

AIRPLANE

48.

SU:r~RCHARGERS.

By
W. G. Noack.

FILE COpy
To b return d to
fil , of teN i
l/; ry Com mitt
May, 1921 .

A ron utica
hington, D. C.

NATIONA1 ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAU?ICS .
TECBNIC i"L

::~O~E

NO. 48

SUP ERe H A R G E R S. '"

By
W. G. Noa.ck ,
Fcrmer En6 l neer, Boaro. of Airplane ~xperts, Charlottenburg .

The e v er- increa3 ing 1emands on the airp l a n e du:r ::"ng the war,
regard to climbing s peed ano. ceiling, nec e ssitat e d th e installat ion of engine.:; of c c
mstd.:::ltly incre 3.s e ci po v:er, nhile the
carrying capacit y C1:ld sre e d. at a serJiceabl e alt~tude did not
pro~ort iO!1at ely inCre i1 2e .
The r e ason for t hi s is to be f ound in
the fact t~at the engir..e pOl-er outP·J.t decr e ase s with the ::'ncre a Re
of flyir~g altitude . If, for instanc:e, an ai.rplan e is still to
'0e ab:l.e to fly at an al t i tude of 5 or 6 kIn ., then the engir:e
must be Cif about tV'Jice the power at sea level that v
vould h&ve
aeen sufficient to keep the airplane in f:ight in tile vic i nity of
the ground.
~ith

The pl'j.ncipal reason for the falling off of the engine p a :ver is the decrease in the density of the air as the airplan e
rises. The manne r in v/hic}} this occurs may be seen i n Table 1,**
whi ch gives the average bar ometer pre SSUTes and tempe rature s during the year, and also the relative pressu=es . Ge nerally speaking, if y stands for the density of the aj.r, (wt.1.en leaving out
moisture as for every gas), and b signifies the pressure and
t
the temperature:
~

y == Yo 760

273
273 of t

in which Yo ~ 1 . 293 kg/cu . m., the density of the air at
mm. mercury column and t == OOC .

b

=

760

* Sonderabdruc k aus der Zeitschrift d e s Vereines deutscher Ingenieure, Jahrgang 1 919, Seite 995.
**Also see A. Wagne r, llContributions relating to the Com.position
of the Atmosphere, n III 1919.

- :3 ....

TABLE

I.

Decrease of the Air Pressure with the Increase in Altitude.

--- -_. --

Al t itude
above
Sea. level

m.
0
1000
2'JOO
3000
4000
5000
6000
7 000
8000
9000

Average
Average
Re:iative
air
yearly
air
pressure
pressure, : temperature, ...
b
um:

Average
density
of the
air, y

mm. mercury.

°e

12-

:kg/ cu .m.

762
674.5
596
525.5
461 .5
405
354.5
309.5
269.5
240

+8 .7
-!·3 .9
-1
-5.9
-11 .6
-16 . 9
-2 3 .7
-31
-37
-45

1
0.885
0.782
0.689
0 . 605
0 . 531
0.465

1.258
1.130
1.020
0 . 914
0 .820
0 .7 35 ,
0.660
0 . 595
0.532
0.489

bo

'J . 400

0 . 357
0 .315

--

Relat ive
density
of the
;; M
_
air
.-'"
LYo - -1
0.900
0 . 810
0.727
0 .653
0 . 584
0 . 524
0 . 473
0 . 423
0.388

If the falling off of the engine power were de pendent upon
the density of the ai:: alone, then the same relat ion r;ould hold
good for both. This is however not generally the case. As has
been shown at the altitude experimental stations, the efficiency of the usual airplane engines falls off considerably faster.
The reason for this is to be found fil'st of all in the action
of the carburetor . The fuel supply in the carburetor does not
decrease in the same degree as the weight of the ai~ inducted at
each piston stroke, the fuel mh:ture becomes too rich and the
thermal efficiency is also decreased., beoause, \lith the number
of revolutions remai~ing the same, the no-load work of the engine, which is affec~ed by the diminished w
orking pressure but
little, remains almost the same; its ratio to the p0\~r output
however, increases with increased altitude. With t~e very low
temperature prevailing at high altitudes , the inducted air may
affect the :ormation of the mixture unfavorably w
hen not sufficj.ently heat ed . For a confirmat ion of the above we refer to the
performance of one of the best of the older Ger~an airplane motors* as sho v in the curves given in Figs. I and 2, in which
m
the power for various inductional temperatures is plotted in relation to the density of the air. If the power of the motor
were proportional solely to the density, that is, the pressure
and the temperature of the outer air, then all the measured
qualities plott ed against the density of the air Would result in

* I1Technische Berichte der Flugzeugmeisterei,11 Vol. III,

1918.

- 3 -

horizontal lines, for i n s ) ance, conv e r t e d from b
c
om3t3r readj.ng, and t = 15° to
N

r

=

N 761""1
J
b

=

760 mm.

bar-

273 + t
-----273

Actually, howev e r, they are curves with a marke d do w w
n ard cou:'se .
Their deviation from the horiz ontal thus yep resents a means of
measuring the altitude p ro~ erties of the engine .
These disadv~:mtag es of the airplane engi:1.e were of course
SOO!1 recognizedj the remedy was hOWever ~10t introduced unt il a
comparatively l a te date.
O
ur adversaries v~re also strenuously
engaged with this Question . * By imp rovinr; the carburetors, e s pecially the so-call e ~ altitude carb ur e tors, the decrease of the
power V[as made to substan ~ ially keep pace with the decrease of
the density of the a i r. By ra ~ sing the ratiO of compression of
the engine from betwe en 4 . 6 and 4 . 9 to 6.6, and. by tLe improvement of the the l'mal e ffici ency which was ther eby brought about,
an improved adaptation of the airplar.e e ngine to the altitude
conditions ~as s ecured.
In the vioinity of the ground the intake of the eng J.ne must b e throttled in order to avoid self ignition and exce 8sive stre s s. As th e ai r plane reaches higher alt i tudes the thr ottl iEg is gradually decr e ased, a n d Ett he i ght s of
from 2 to :3 km. it f J.nally ce:=t ses entirely . Up to this point
the engine power remai n s a lmost the came. A~other step in advance is made ·;~ith engine s of ex tra siz e , in W
1...iC:l the displacement of the piston. is i n 0Te a s e d in oomparison witn ord.inary engines and in rela.tior. t o the dimensions of the ~ar ·cs of the driving gear . These e nsir:es riUst &.. J.so be thl' ottlec1 w!len n0o,r the
ground in orde::- to keep the c.'.T rag e pis~on p :::-e ssure so 1.0W th2..t
e
the power O"L'.tP'-.lt dos s not exc e e d. tl1e nOi''J i:r.al po w
er. The supercomp:;:-ession c an also be corr:oille d with s-Llp e r-d .~ mension.
In this
ws.y it is possihle ·c 0 mair.ta in the eng.in es at a 1:.ni:orm power up
to an altitude of alr:..ost 4 k.n. Bey ond. this p oir.t 2. falling off
of the power is avoia.ed by the usc of compres s ors of supercharg ers, Which Will be tl'eatcci in detail later.
The purpoae of the com
pressor is to fur n ish the eng ine with
air of sea level density, no matter w
hat the surround.ing atmosphere may be. Up to a certain prescribed altit~de there is ~ h en
the same pressur e in fro n t of the carbu r etor a s that prevailing
at sea level, and for w
hioh the engine has been built.
Three general typ es of comp ressors - reciprocal, 'rotc: ry ,
and centrifugal, may be conside red for this purpose . R~clprocat­
ing compressors, as far as is known, have never been trled as
they are too heavy and the valves are too complicated.

* Compare llZeitschrift
and July 5, 1918.

1918" p.61, 816; Eng ineering, June 28

-

4 -

Of the ro"cary con:pressors, those of the Wittig* and Roots
types as w·ell as compressors 'v
vith revolving vanes were tried,
but nothing is lqlown as ye t regarding the results. The centrifugal cOffipressor has prove d the most suitable up to the present;
its construction was taken up by several factories during the
last two years of the war and brought to a high state of perfection.
The compressors are, as a rule, driven direct by the engine>
mostly at the end opposite the airscrew. It is true that this
drive was objected to at £j.rst as it was feared that the crankshaft would be endangered by torsion vibrati ons. Ho wever, these
fears have so far p r oved u n founded. In the case of airplane s
with severa l engines, giant ai~ p lan e s especidlly, the compre s sor
or supercharger is driven by a special engine and in that case
furnishes the air for all the e ngines. For the airplanes with
several engi.nes in a central plant there is also a good solution
of the problem.
In the latter case the common supeJ.:charger can be
connected directly with the central plant. As to whether indlvidual supercha~gersor one corumon 3upercharger is better, also
r vhether the drive from the central po w plan'~ or from a specj.al
.
er
motor is to be p~eferred, has not yet been de cided. Each arrangement has its advantages and disadvanta.ges. W
ith single engine
airplanes there can of course be only th e direct drive from the
engine. W
ith giant airplanes carrying a large servj.ce crew, the
drive from a special engine is better adapted to the air requirements at the various a.lti·G
ueies as it is then always possible to
gj.ve the corr.pra ssor engine the number of revolut ions COTre sponding to the air requirem ents at any given tjme. Tile compress0!'
that is coup1ed wi tn tt.e :nain engine or with. the central plant
has, on the con '~rary, al w'ays tlle same fiul t iple of the number of
revolutions of the main engine; it tt.erefore generates pressures
which are too hj.gh for the lowe:r al t ~tujes and the d.ischarge
·must be throttled. 'llhus the amount of energy requj.red for the
compress0l and tlle temperature of the co:npressec. ail' at-tain the ir
maximum near groucd level, and as it is in the lower air strata
that the hi ghest natural '~emperatures predominate, the compressed air react.es the carburetors in a very heat~d condition at the
lower al t i tude s . Although experiment s have shown tha.t most airplane engines can stand temperatures eveYl B
,bove lOOoC. in front
of the carburetor perfectly well, at least for short periods,
neve~theless this heating of the fresh air results in a considerable drop in power output. In order to compensate for the latter
and in order to generate the driving power for the compressor,
it is necessary to furnish the engine ~~th air at greater p~eBsure
than se<:l:=-level . . . This causes an overload which is, however, unimportant for the ·short time necessary for the take-off and for
climbing the first few thousand neters.
* Ccmpare "Zeitschrift 1918," p.6l, 816; Engineeri~g, June 28 and
July 5, 1918.
1

- £5 -

Figure 3 shows how "'Ghe errgim:e may be overloaded by the supply of fresh air u~der high pressure. In these experiments
the charging pressures immediately in front of the carburetor
amounted to 830, 760 and 720 mm. Hg. (curves 1, 2 and 3), the
temperatures of the fresh air also directly in front of the carburetor, we re 40 0 , 30 0 , and 8 d , the exhaust pressure was Lmaltered, 736 mro. It is evident that slight pre-compressions are
sufficient to secure remarkable power incr.eases and to provide
the extra energy for the driving of the snp[;lI'ena:rg()...I::' .c 'onnc'ct";t.:d with
the !engine.
The mistaken conception, entertained not only by aviators
but also by the engine manufacturers, that the engines are permanently overloade 'i by the superchargers because of the considerable gain of the airplanes in climbing rate and ceiling, must
be contradicted here. As long as the pre s sure in front of the
carburetor is not increased above the pressure at ground level,
the engine works mechanically and thermodynamically under the
same conditions as on the test stand or in the airplane near
ground level. If, howe~er, the altitude up to wh ich the compressor furnishes the full pressure is exceeded, the powe r of the
engine falls off in the same way as occurs with t~e ordin~y engine at its start from the ground. The purpose of the compressor is to raise the flying altitude of tile airplane. ~Vnen the
flying is done at these altitudes, the loading of the en~ine : ~n
the vicinity of the altitude l~mit is exactly as high as with
the motor wj.tnout compresscr , only with the difference that the
airplane is now at a c onsiderably "higher altitude.
The power of an engine with compressor is also somewhat increased by another cause, not involving a correspondingly increased absolute piston pressure . The reduction in the pressure
of the outer air causes ~he exh2_
ust tack pressure to be diminished, the engine furthermore works under air pressure during
the suction st~oke, thus converting the delivery of the compressor into useful work. These two circumstances increase the useful piston pressure, and consequently the power ou~put, at the
altitude of 5,000 m. to the extent of almost one a"'Cmosphere or
about 12.5%.
.
In order to calculate the power required for the supercharger, Fig. 4 may be ~sed. As the superchargers are not cooled and in consequence of the ir small dimensions, sub st ant ial
losses in the clearance of the impellers, in the pressure compensation, and in the stuffing boxes, must be taken into account,
with the result that the compression curve is a poly trope lying
above the adiabatic cur~e. For the purpose of a general survey ,
the compression ratios for ~o for the various altitudes are al so
plotted. The values of b have been taken from Table I. Fig.
4 'also shows the expenditure of power for the adiabatical compression of 1 kg/sec. of air having an initial temperature corresponding to the mean yearly temperat~re . tm'

- 6 -

The output of airplane engines (when refer:i."ed to the piston
displacement) amounts, g~neralljr speaking, to from 1 to 1.1 h . p.
per liter , the indu~ted ~eight of the air from 3.5 to 3.6 kg.
per h.p./hr. From this we get the expenditure of energy i7ith adiaoatlc conpres sicl1 of the fresh air in relation to the output
of the :engine at the various pressure ratios or altj.tudes. The
actual expenaiture of en~rgy is increased by the 108se s in supercharger and drive. Detailed tests with a supercharger built by
Brovm, Boveri & Co. in Mannheim for llCO to 1200 h.p. engine output (that is, a ci..elivery of a-oout 4200 kg/hr. ar:d a pressure ratio
of 1. 2) had an efficiency of 65% referred. to the adj.abatj.c curve
and converted to -15 0 initial temperature. With later models
68~ WdS attained, even wit~ smaller quantities of air.
The addition of the pI'esoure connection does not, for the
most part , require any subst~ntial alteration of the engines, so
that their standardized p~od~ction is not interru9ted. The most
favorable engine for t~e purpose is t he 26C h. p . Daimler :eng,i ne.
It s one piece carbu:~et or aLd oomnon air S1."-ct ion tube made possible the immediate a-"cta0hrllent of pressure connect ion. It was only necessary to consi6.er whether it 1,"/o·:.11d be r.lOr9 advantageous
to take the air fr01:'l the atmosphere direct or through the engine
crankcase passage. W
ith the 260 h,p. Daimler enginethe air is
inducted throuGh a channel under the cranl:case , and "then through
a quarter bend to the carburetor in order that it will be heated
and that oil dYaining off into the oil sump 0
will oe cooled. The
temperature of the inducted air is raised 15 to 20° above the
temperature outside. Thi s results in raising the final temperature of compressi.on in -;;he supercharger. As, i,:ith the supercharger in operation, the air is mOre than sufficiently heated
in consequence of the compression; even with the very 10Vlest outside temperatul"es, it seems advisable to take it direct from the
atmosphere as is done with all other engines. With the 260 h.p .
Daimler engine this was however not possible at first because
When the weather was warm the air current alone was not sufficient for cooling tile crankcase. The lubricatinb oil in it was
heated to between 85 and 95 0 C., became too thin, and did not
reach the piston pins . This was remedied by circulating the oil
through an oil cooler by means of a gear pU'np driven from the cam
shaft by a flexible shaft, the cooler forming a part of the engine housing.
The air reaches the carburetor direct from the pressure connection. The carburetor itself needs no alteration as long as
the gro~~d level pressure to which it is adjusted is not exceeded to an appreciable extent. The space above the float, or
the float chamber overflO W also the container from w
,
hich the carburetor directly receives the fuel, are to be connected with the
pressure pipe of the supercha~ger by a compensating tube, as the
same pressure must prevail abOve the float and in the fuel tank
as at the pressure connection of the supercha~ger. All the carburator o~enings must be closed so that no leakage of fuel is

- 7 is p o ss i ble. A light detachable cap is ::itted over the f:2.oat
val ve s t em guide. The guide s of t:18 inlet va: Ve s are al 'rays
suffic iently aiTtight so that no special provision is necessay-y
at that point . In order to render -(),'3.,ck firj::lg harm~ess :.t is
advisable to fit re~_ief ~Talves of ge~erous size in the p~_ping
bet ween the pr e SS\lre connect ion of tr.e aUjJ6r.charger and tee car buretor. The we,ll between the last trw stages of -:he sU1J8rcharge r is , above all, endange~ed during violent back fi~ing.
In t he case of one common supercharger for several engines,
each engine has c, connec-:' ir..g Iliec:e (Fig. 5) 'J.s-ually an a:uminium cast i ng i'7i th a large '.:>1 ow-off valve (a ca:;;:> J::el:i in place b"St~
several s:prings ) , a thro·ctle vaJ..ve for shutting cff the compre ssed air (missing in Fig. 5), and an autom3.ttc 3.ir suction valve .
Th e suction va17e permits the intake of air direct from the atmosphere as long as the supercharge~ is not work ing) when, on
the contrary , the supercharger is fuy-nishing air of hi ghe r pressure than that outside, -:hen the val-,~e closes . T:1.e connecting
pie c e is connected to the float chamber by a pressure compensation tube . Special attention nust be given to the fuel discharge . The ut l,lOst care l~'lUSt be tal~en t 0 J:.reveT~t a n overflow
of fuel at the nozzle froll running int a the t·Ll.be connect :i_ons
(which in giant airplanes are built into the lifting surfaces
and are of consider able length) as during back firL1g the y might
explode and endar"ger the airpl ane. ror this rep.son the connecting piece is provided ~ith a fuel dra~n cup having a drain cock
or small opening so that the misplaoed. fuel can drain off . The
loss of air t hus occasioned is unimportant. A~ 0pe~ U t~be
filled with mercury is the most suitable means for measu:'iTlg the
pressure of the central supercharger8.
On it is a millimeter
scale which sho"NS the c.iff8!'ent pressures appertaini::lg -to the
various altitudes, For single superc'he.rge:.'s on sllial:" airplanes,
lov; pre ssure ga-<.lge s are useC:, wh:'ch Sl10 V; either tLe absolute
pressure or the ::'>1'es8ure In excess of the pre ssure outside.
In
the first c a se the pressure of the air in fron~ of the carburetor is always adjusted to one atmospne~e .
I~ the second. case
the regulation for the variol;'s altio:;udes is accol'ding to a spec:ial graduation of the alti~ude indica-:oI .
With superchurgers driven dir.ect by the main e~gines, and
which al V\ra.vs run at the full number of revo~ut ions, the exce ss
pressure at and :lear grcun:l level (with the exception of t: e fe -,v
mm . excess pressure neceEsary for the compen sation of the powe r
consumed QY sup.excnar~e.r)II~'-J.S~ be destroyed by throttling, that
is, the delivery of an exoess quantity of air must be prevented.
The most economical way is to fit the throttle in the supercharger suction pipe as the supercharger will t he n deliver air
of less density . Furthermore, the so-called surging is aVOided,
because behind the throttle expanded air complet ely fills the
vane spac es and "the supercharger works at all altitudes under the
conditions for which it was designed, except for ~he temperature

differences. 'I'be openi~g of the slj.ding thro-:;tle "'.-alve fer hand
oper~tion by 5rown) BOV3T:" Co. (gig. e) is just la::::ge enough to
pernnt the passe.ge of as nluc~1 air as is requireci by the engine
when running ·v7~. th its fU}. l nUl:lber of rev-o}utior..s 3;t gr~ur~d level.
The sl ide valve is cpe::::ated b:/ rr.eans of w:"re.3 and a le-..rer fr om
the pilot's seat. The lever 's provided with a notcbed guide indicating the various altitudes. For further certa:'nty, the l)ilot
is furn ished '.'nth one of the atove-llien~ioned low press1ue gauges;
tbe hand of the SaDe must indh;ate one atu:osphere or else t~:l e
same altitude as the h3.nd lever.
In order to pre-:rent the engine,
before it is nmr.ing at fV.ll speed, from recej.ving too m1J.ch air
and therefore exploding or stalling, and for the purpose of reducing the nu~ber of control leve~s, t~e throttles of the s~~er­
charger and oarburetor may be coupled in suoh a was that at first
only mixture is delivered .
If the carburetor' is qu:.te open, and
the hand lever c 0:1t:'..nu3s to be shifted, it will s·~ay open and it
will be possible to release more air at the slJ.percharger. When
shutting off the process is reversec..
In place of operation by hand, automatic regula,tion may be
substituted. This entirely relieves the pilot fY0m controlling
the supercharger. Severa,l different fOl1.nS o~ appa.:CGt:.lS for t1:is
purpose, which utilize the expans .i on of barometr-:!.c cells under
the influence of the decreasing air pressure ~itn ~ncreasin6 altitude~ have been propose- by the
Propelleroau Lo~enzen, 3erlinNeu-K~lln, and by Brown . Boveri & Coo, Mannheim .
When the supercharger is driven by a special engine , it is
practical to make the r0Ugh adjustment of the num'-oer of ~evolut ions by thr ottlin6 the m:l.xt ·~re at tl e d:: iving eng:.ne a:1.d. to ma.ke
the accurate adjus :c ment by throttling the air at the superoharg-:er . Both throttling arr2,ngereent s car: be mani.pc.1at.ed f::-om th~ Pllot's seat, the revolut ion ind.icat or of the su:pe rcha,rger englne
being also visible :;:ro:11 the 'Oilot I;:, sea-t. Waen idling the main
engines, the air withcira v fi-om t~e supe:;~charger is red'~ced al VI:
most to the amo1.:nt required for t:1.e supe::cl1arb~r engine. TIle
load of the supercharger thus drops to about :/3; in order ~o
prevent the superc:narger from rEnning awa: it therefore r.ms'G be
thr ottled at the sane tine as the main engine s . The superc~~a:;.g­
er engine is connected to the compressed air pipe ir~ t:'1e sa:ne
way as the other engine s.
Wit h the use of a supercharger the fuel system usually undergoe s some al terat ions . Generally speak ing, in an airp-!.cme. fuel
is fed from a gravity ta:u.k Cits supply being receivcd from a
main tank ) , or ovith a fuel pump~ the exoess from which passes
back to the main tank through an excess press~re valve. The
placing of the main tank ULcer pressure is avolr-ed in consideration of the ~eibht and st:cength req'...llred (at 5 kl1. a:ti·~ud.e tho
cont ainer would be subjected to almost 1/2 atmosphere of exoess
pressure) and also because of the danger of fi~e .
In the simplest

-

- ---------~ -___o.c~-~

- 9 ...

but most usual case (Fig. 7), the main tank itself is used as a
gravity tank. The required excess pressure on the fuel at the
carburetor is from 3 to 3 .5 m. nat e r colunm and is generated "';)y
the static pre ssure of the high conta iner. The float and float
chamber are su- e ct ed to the supercharger pressure, the movement
oj
of the float is th~s independent of the supercharge r pressure aslong as the pressure compensation can take plac e fa st enough.
For short compensation pipes (for small aircraft) 6 mID. bore is
sufficient, fo~ long ones (for giant airplanes) 8 to 10 mID .
Special care m~st be taken to make the pipes ruld connections absolutely t ight.
.
Fig. 8 shoYvs the design of the fuel system wihlen employing a
pump, which may be driven by.._.th~ eI?-ginE.? ~tself or . by ~o~~ other
power and which forces -elle fuel from the main tank to the carburetor. 1f the PD...'11P de1i-lTel' s more than ' is ccnsumecf, - the ' excess
w
ill return thl'OUgh the regu.lati:r.g valve*) v;hich is set for between 2 and 2.5 m. water colum~. In o~der also to render the
latter independent of the s~percharger pressure l the overflow
cup and the float c~amb e r of tile carburetor are connected by a
pressure compens&ti on pipe. The main fuel tanks are subjected to
atmospheric pr essure only. In order that no supercharger air
should reach the main tanlc, a float valve is i nse rted bet 'Veen
the overflow cup and the main tank. This float valve is also
connected with the pre ssure oO~;1pen sation pipes . Its manner of
a ction needs no explanation . The size of tLe float is dependent
upon the fact that the upward p~essure on the float valve must
overcome the pressure di ff e rence acting on the shut-off valves,
t~e upper side of the latte~ being subjected to the supercharger
air pressure a~d its lower side to the tank pressure or outside
pressure. The roost common arrangement of the fuel system for
giant airplanes (F ig. 9 ) is compose d of the parts as described .
Instead of the ex cess pressure valve, a drop tank .i::1 uset;Lthere-;
h.o.:wever.
The airplane superchargers described. below, and wh ich we r e
in existence at the termination of the v
sr, were for the most
part firSt executions of the designs and doubtle s s le ave room
for improvement '.vith regard to weight and space req'-1i~ements and
also with re gard to many details .
of
The first supercharger/this kind, by Otto Schwade & Cc., El.'furt (Figs. 10 to 20) was de signed for direct coupli::1g to a 260
h .p. airplane engine and an output OfblOOO kg. of air per hour
with a maximum c ompre ss ion ratio of ~
1 . 52, w
hich corresb
ponds to a constant engine output up to an altitude of about 3 . 5

**

* The illustration shows the regulating valve by Benz & Co .,
Uannheim .

** German Reich's pat ent applied for.

- 10 -

km. It consists of four adjacent chambers. The first of tbese
encloses the gear drive and each of the other three contains an
i :npe ller with its corre sponding diffuser. The c:!J.ambers are all
co-axial and combij1ea into a single block withou·c horizontal
jo ints . In assembling, an impeller and a housing are put in
place alternately and the housings are held tog8t~er by screws
at the circumiEerences" w~ile the i mpellers axe held on the sh2..ft
by means of a nut at the thrust bearing. The challlbers are macie
of aluminum castings, ~he impellers of special steel. The d~iv­
ing ge.a r has two o])posi "'cely ,located in;t.ermE1 ';iiat~ gear sets running on ball oearings over stationary studs. The impellers revolve at 10,500 r.p.m., the driving gear at 1400 r. p .m., ~nd the
intermediate gea. rs ,at .3 500 r .. p. m.. .Wi th the imp.eller dian:eter of
250 rrurI., :the ."p.e r ipher~l spee d a.mount s to 140 m. per second .
TIle ge,a r wheels are made of chrOOl.e nickel steel, case-hardened .
. Th.e. pinion on tpe supercharger shaft is built integJ:'9.-l TIi th a
S;lip coupling cOllsisti:lg of four bronze annulus sectors w
hich are
pressed against the cO·.lpling box b",) centrifugal force. This
coupling is intended to facilitate the starting of the ·engdne ..amd
to protect the driving gear from the violent acceleration shocks
When starting, as th e coupling does not connect the impellers until the engine has attained a speed of 600 r. p,m . For 1ubri9ation
of the driving gear the wheels are arranged to ciip into an oil
bath. Figure . 20 shows the supercharger, with ~he carburetor
and float chamber mounted on ~op as well as the pressure compensat ion pipe connectiT1g the flqat. chamber vyith the ,discharge connection of the supercharger. The superch.arger ,. 9-.r::9-~w~ .,air from
the bottom of the engine crankcase (which is there"by cooled), and
a throttle valve is inserted in the air inlet to the supe:pcharger
so that the pressure delive red by the latter cC.n be regulated.
The cOffiplete supercharger with connections as first executed
weighed 47.5 kg., and if we take into consideration that the
w
eight of the 260 h.p. engine is 420 kg. and its output at 3.5
km . altitude. is only 170 h.p., and that the d:::-iving of the supercharger requires 20 h.p . . then the engine without superoharger
;
would have a ~~it weight of 2 . 5 kg/h.p. at this altitude as compared to 1 . 95 kg/h.p. With supercharger. Superchargers of this
kind have been installed in A.E.G. airplanes (see F~g . 21).
They are also easily combined with revolving cylinder engines,
(see Figs . 22 to 24). In the latter case, the supercharger
takes its air directly from the atmosphere and forces it into
the inlet pipe which is connecteQ to the tubular crankshaft .
The Brown, Boveri & Co. br 2~nch in Mannheira., who even bef ore the war had kept in close t~uch with their parent house in
Switzerl and with reference to the construction of turbo- compressors , did the most exhaustive work in connection with airplane superchargers. Their first model was designed for the
1200 h.p . power plants of the g iant airplanes (Figs, 25 and 26)
and was driven by a Daimler airplane engine which also received
its fresh air from the supercharger. W
ith this plant the float
chamber of the carburetor of the cirivinF. eng in~ is enclosed in a

- 11 -

(see Fig.
box, the latt8 r being subj ect to sU;'J$ rchQ..rger pres sure outsi de
ent of the
25)1 thus rend ering the carb ureto r inGe pend
ger is fitpres sure . At the sucti on conn ectio n of the sup e rc~ar The Staak en
26).
ted a hand -con troll ed thro ttle devic e (see Fig. in the same mangian t airpl anes TIere equip ped vuth supe rcha rgers may be seen the
ner (see Fig. 27). In the midd le of the pictu re conn ected to the
air pipe lead ing to the supe rchar ger engin e and ttle valve for
box shape d en~losure of the ca:"b ureto r. The throand sproc ket
the mixt ure is hand -ope rated by means· of a chair.. the ccns truct ion
cont rol from the pilo t's seat. Figu re 28 shows ples of this S"...lPof the supe rchar gers used . In more rece nt nexam remo ved to the
erch arge r (Fig. 29), the sucti on conn ectio was air migh t aid in
drivi ng end so that the incom ing strea. m of cold resse d air concool ing the drivi ng gear . Furth~rmore, the comp divid ed at the
duit s, which in the older type s had alrea dy been strea m, now
fina l cell , were , for bett er guida nce of the air
sion.
conn ected to the hous ing by a prac tical ly tang entia l exten
of air per hr. at
This supe rchar ger norm ally furni shes 4200 kg. spher e final pres 0.52 atmo spher e initi al press ure and one atmo 120 to 125 h.p.
sure , the corre spon ding power cons~~ption being and that of
The speed of the driv: tng engin e is 1450 r.p.m ., is of the 4 stage
the supe rchar ger shaft 6000 r,p.m.;superoh~rg~ the perip hera l
type , the impe ller diam eter being 470 mm., thus gear case , inle t
speed is abou t 150 m/ sec. The hous ing, drivi ng of an alum inum
pipe conn ectio n, and diffu ser vane s are all cast stee l haYi ng a
alloy . The impe llers were made of spec ial alloy n of 15%. The
tens ile stren gth of 81 kg/sq .mm. and an elon gatio el stee l with
ends of the hollo w shaf ts are made of chrome nick n of 16.5% .
a tens ile stren gth of 76 kg/sq .mm. and an elon gatio
l frem the BisThe gear s and pinio ns are of chrome nick el steeare subje ct to
marc k Works. The bear ings at the roto r pinio n . Co. The gear s
grea t stres s and are rolle r bear ings by the Normsw
has 54
were exec uted with espe cial care. * The drivi ng heel 4.05 TT
of
teeth and the pinj. on 13 teeth with circu lar pitch h.p. , the teeth
and a face width of p 50 mm. \Then trans mitt ing 125 case- hard ened
are loade d to c = bt =113 kg/ sq. cm. 2 • They are
betw een
and groun d on Maag mach ines . Oil is injec ted dire ctly circu being
eter,
the teeth throu gh two nozz les of 2 mm. diamslOW speed shaf t.
drive n from the smal l
lated by a gear p~mp
oran ksha ft by a
The supe rchar ger is co~nected to the engin e comp lete supe rchar ger
leath er block jOint (Voit h coup ling) . The
with a disk fly
with its drive weigh s 145 kg. The coup ling desir able in orde r
whee l moun ted there on, i1hich has been found
ng gear s
to secur e a smoo ther oper ation and to prote ct the drivi
agai nst the shock s of the engi nes, weig hs 20 kg.
with
Anot her supe rcha rger, havin g a capa city of 1000 kg/h r. of
press ure
an initi al press ure of 0.56 atmo spher e and a fina l to 30 h.p.
requ ires from 28
one atmo spher e (Figs . 30 to 32),
from 260
and is desig ned for direc t connec~ion to an engin e of
* By the IIZah nl'ad fabri k Fried richs hafe n."

- 12 t 10,00 0 r.p. m.,
to 300 h.p. at 1600 1'.p.I' 1. Its impe llers make abou speed of 150:n /
l
and have a diar:re ter of 290 mm ., gi'lir. .g a perip hera
have 82 and 13 teeth of 3.5 n cirou lar
sec. The driv i ng wh.e e 1s
of the fina l
pitch and a face width or 25 rom. The depen dence
speed s is
pres sure upon the amoun t deliv ered at the diffe rent
sho~m in Figu re 33.
ned to meet
The coup ling (Figs . 34 to ~6) was spec ially desig
ct 2:ttac h:nen t
the obje ction s of ei,1 gine mc"n ufact urers to the dire lle r of the
of the supe rchar ger3 . As a matt er of f3.cti , the impe8ions, a
supe rchar ger repre sents , in spite of its srr.al l ~imen ionc: .l verot&t
gyra ting mass which , in c onseq uence of its grea t
saIlJe kine tic energ y as that of the
loci ty, has appro xima tely the
was there fore
airsc rew at the othe r end of the cran ksha ft. It conse quen ce of
s migh t arise in
feare d that synch rol1o us vibr ation
gers havin g
whi ch the shaf t mig:o.t break . For the large supe rchar nce of the
at the c ircum fe:::-e
the ir ov-,n engin e the l eatile l' pack ing
i.; c"lso advi sacoup ling is probR .bly 8uff icien'c) ne've rthel ess it s of a flyw heel.
s by mean
ble in this case to reauc e the vibr ation
heli cal
For supe rchar gers for sing le ~.ngrn.~s , cou~:)~j,ngs with throu ghsucc essfu l
sprin gs were there fore used and Vlhisfl prov ea
':"circi llnfe rence
out. In tests illade with scrib ers moun ted ;on ..t .h e was obta ined durof the two disk s, the defle ction of tile sp ~ing8
ding to four
ing oper ation . Shoo ks were there by note d corre spon w1:iC!l t rans time s the norm al torqu e. The disk s and tile sp:"'l ngs vi1Jr ation s
mit the torqu e f:Qi'm a univ ersal jOin-;:;, so that the e (whic h owing
of the entir e supe rcha: -ger in relat ion to the engln t wood en
to the inten se viora tions of the engin e and the lighare of.
c
frame of an air plane .are unav oidab le) may be taken S4: kg . ',the
i:vi th drivi ng gear is
The weig ht of the supe rchar ger
the sprln g
thro ttle arl'an geme nt (Fig. 6) weigh s 4-1/2 kg ., and
coup ling WBighs 6 kg.
.ced supe rBrow n, Bove ri & Co. (Man nheim b::-an ch), also produ
a drivi ng ratio
charg e rs for 350 h.p. airpl ane '!:l11.t?'iI.l..:36 and. havin g pipe from the
of 1350 t o 10,00 0 r.p.m . (Fig. 37). T1:e press ure
to ar air cool er
supe rchar ger W8,S dere cted dOWIlwa::-Q .3-nd cO'l mect ed rchar ger and
rted betvr een supe
of alum inum , which v.as to be i:1.se
in relat ion to the quc,Ylt ity of air
engin e. Suct ion press ure p
a cons tailt findeliv ered for vario us r.p.m .lof the engi ne, with ion tem~erature
cons tant suct
al pre ssure p = one atn~osphere and

t

1

=

-15 0 C.

2

of this cool ing
Test s to deter mine whet her the insta llati on ut suffi cien t to
an incre ase in engin e outp
appa ratus resul teQ in
. were not co!njusti fy the addi tiona l weig ht of from 10 to 15 kg
plete d.
er kind
For the gian t plan.e s of 1800 to 2000 h.p. , yet anoth engin e
drive by a 160 h.p. Daim ler
of supe rchar ger with a spec ial
n of the 1200
had been almo st comp leted , and also a speC ial desig

- 13 h.p. supercharger with vertical shaft which was to be in3~ a11c~
in the 1000 h.p. single screw airplane of th3 Linke Hoffoan Works
of Bres1au. and dr iven diTect frem a central pOi7er plant (see :r;'~ g e .
39 and 40). T:le tra,Ylsmission gear bet ween :propeller shaft (540
r.p.m.) and supercharger shaft (6000 r.p.m.) is built into the
housing of the central pO"\7er plar..t.
.
The A.E.G. (Hennigsdorf) was also successful with superchargers built in its tUTbi-ne factory (Fig. 41). This supe rcharger is driven through an automatic cent rifugal clutch of
w
hich one member is mounted on the end of the er_gine crankshaft .
This clutch engages only w
hen the engine speed exceeds 600 r.p. m.
and then only by the frictj.on ot the gripping surfaces . The
latter were originally faced with Ferodo :iber, but as this material is difficult to get in Germany, tDe clutch was convert ed
into a centrifugal type with rocker arms . Between the clutch
and the supercharger are insert e d a pair of spur gears with a
ratio of 1 to 6.9. This is follo wed by a small inc e rmediate
shaft with a square block type universal joint, affording a c ertain amount of flexibil ity to take care of slight changes of the
bearings and of the vibrations during flight . At the same time
this shaft forms a yielding member and a safeguard against fracture, thus protect ing the crankshaf''G in case of rapid acce1era~
tion or obstruc ti on within the supercharger.
The three impellers run at 10,000 r,p.m. and consist of
steel disks with vane s riveted on. The diffuGer c ase has a horizontal joint througb the center. The pressure ratiO is 1.7 at
full speed which corresponds to a con stant output of the engine
up to an altitude of 4 k~ . When attaching the supercharger to
the 260 h.p . Dair:ller engine the usual suction elbow to the carburetor is replaced by a connection pi.ece uith automatic valve
and throttle valve. The air is dra.m through the chc.·nnel of the
crankcase and passes through t~e swinging vahre ( v;~'lj.ch opens automatically ) directly into the carburetor, wnen the throttle
device in front of the supercbarger is closed. T~'l en the Sl...per,..
charger will be running 1 i ght . If, on the other ha:i.ld, the throttle valve is opened t he a'...ltomat ic valve will close aEci the air
passes to the e:lgj.ne thro"..lgh the supercharge r. The Glii)'inr-;~ng
valve can be adjusted to the various E..ltlt1..lc.es from ti18 pilot ' s
seat by means of a Bow
den wire; it C2.n hO .1ever also be aut omat ically controlled by means of a barometric cell.
T

The supercharger requires about 10 percent. of the 3ng-im: output, and its we i ght is 56 kg ., including pipes and coupling. In
the later models the coupling alone weighs 9 kg ., and the we ight
of the parts necessary for the installation attachment is also
9 kg.
The A.E.G . also made superchargers with separate drive for
giant airplanes (Fig. 42) .

orks alao buil t a~d teste d s~per­
The Si~m~ns-~chuckart W
t to t he
chal'[ Sers WhJCll haa. be en desig ned for dire ct attac hmen
r rotar y ::rnB,~i!fi:D:%.
260 h.p. Daim ler engi nes, in comb inati on \lith Jchei ing of the
.,
but full fligh t trial s ~e:re fore stall ed by the sign
othe r modain ~iff e l.'ence, as compa red with the
Arm istice . The m
ion gear
els of supe rcha rgers , is that the spur whee l trans miss of the
end
with inter rued iate Wheel is fitte d at the prop eller s to the carcomp resse d ai:::- passe
cran ksha ft (s ee Fig. 43). The
fuse lage .
bure tor throu gh a pressu~e pipe loca ted outsi de of the
over valv e,
Just ahea d of the carb ureto r is place d a chang e frem the atair
which give s the pilo t the choic e betw een takin g or comp resse d air
in the cran kcas e,
mosp here throu gh the chan nel
ger is a t wo
from the supe rchar ger (see Fig. 44). The supe rchar 27% at groun d
of
stage type and supp lies an incre aSe in press ure 6900 r.p.m . or a
vmen runn ing at
19°C )
759 rom., t
leve l (b
h. p.
hera l speed of 145 ro/ sec. The s1.'.p ercha rger for the 115
perip
a 3 stage super c!lar ger
revo lving cylin del' engin e (Fig. 45) is
groun d leve l when
and supp lies an incre ase in press ure of 30% at is 11.5 ~.p. for
n
runn ing at 8600 r.p.m . The power co~sumptio its drive this supe r6.5 cU.m. of air dra1ffi in per minu te. With
char ger we ighs 28 kg.
e
With engin es of cons tant outpu t the airsc rew probl em becam
ity of the
dens
one of spec ial impo rtanc e. With the decr easin g ase also. But,
the torqu e of the screw decre
air the thru st and
leve l powe r
as the engin e with sU}Je rchar ger · retai ns its groun d ased .. For
outp ut) the speed of the screw is eJ~cessively incre
to the
adap t ing the po weI.' auso rbing capa city of the prop eller
which 3'· which
dens ity of the air there are vario~s alter nativ es of
have alrea dy appl jed will be ment ioned here.
scre Vi'
By chan gl.ng the numb er of revo lut ions of the drivi ngby
two
gear , the engin e
means of a varia ble speed
rent diam eters , where by a
sets of beve l gear s of diffe
.
redu ction in spe e d from 1400 r.p.m . to 900 or 1000 r.p.m
may be effec ted.
s
scre w
Seco nd:- By vary· ing the pitch . Seve ral types of these actu ally
th5-t has
have been teste d, but the only one
been used is that desig ned by Prof . Reis sner, and m~n­
ufac tured by both the Helix Prop eller Works of Bres lau
and the Hirth Expe rime ntal Cons truct ion Stati on at two
Cann statt . This prop eller has been insta lled with es
diffe rent mode ls of the adju sting mech anism . Blada ~od
of
moun ted on a hollo w shaf t are shift ed by means blad es
the
slidi ng throu gh the shaf t and conn ected to
by a linkw ork. Blad ea moun ted on the solid shaf ts are
gear
shift ed by movi ng a ring cont rolle d by a beve l es by two
mech anism and vmich is conn ected with the blad for aulink s. These prop eller s are now also arran ged

Firs t: -

- 15
tomatic contrcl
Third:-

1;)y

~

means of

tl

centrifugal governor:.

By cha~gj,ng the ~UC1ber of re~.!olut ions by re;sulat in§; t:~e

engine. F:>r this an ordinary airscrew is used 'out
with a greater pitch than usual. As the power a':lscri:pd
by a propeller increases as the third power of i~s sPeed
of revol~tion, but decreases only as tne first power
of the air densit;y , at an a:-!. t j,tllde of ab out 6 k::1., a.t
which the air density is only about 1/2 that at gI'o~nd
leve l, the speed of re701utioL of th§_propeller needs
to be inc-reased. in the ratio of 3J 2 = 1.2599, or by
abo~t 36% if its power ~bsorbing capacity is to re~ain
the sane at ground le-vel.
W
ith most airplane engines the power c'u.rve is rather flat
in the vicinity of the customary nurr,ber of revolutions, belov"r
vvhich the torqne incre3,ses with decreasing r.p.m. W
ith a give n
screw it is therefore ~)ossible to maint2.in constant po',rer from
the ground to an altitude of 6 km ., if the speed is changed only
from 1200 to 1500 r.p.m. By supplying air at sligr~tly 8,bove sea
level pressure, we are able to overloal the eLgine some~hat so
that the airplane can take off wi 'Gh the engine at 130Q instead
of 1200 r.p.m. Generally speaking, screws that are designed for
an altitude of 3 km. with regard to den3ity, number of revolutions, and air speed, may be considered adapted for use on engines with const an~ output up to an altitude of 5 lml . NevertheIe S8, this is B, COlt1promise which involves the disadvantage t:i.iat
within the inc:rea.sed engine speed :-ange there is likely to be a
cri tical speed of the engine at wh:'ch t:1e latte r vibrate s exce ssively and cause s bree,kage of fuel oil pires or water pipes .
In ord.er to better judge the superiority of an airplane
which is equipped v{ith a supercharger, we refer to the following:
Flying speed:- As the density of t~e air decreases the resistance to an airplane diminis!.es , but so also does its carrying
capacity. W
ith airplanes equipped with ordinary engines this
necessitate s an increased angle of the wings, therGby increasing
the driving res~stance.
With constant engine power, it is possible to increase t~e speed as ait density decreases, th~s maintaining nearly a constant angle of iricidence at increasing altitudes. The velocity v at any g1.¥~n altitudG with the prevailing air density y is v = vo J Yo , in which v o , Yo are the
corresponding valu.es at ground le.fel~

1)

The cl imbi~speed:- The climbing speed remains the
oret ically up to the al t i tude at whic:r~ the engine st ill
its ground level power . From then on the rate of cli ~b
in proportion to the de crease in the density of the air
of the carburetor.

2)

same theshov's
decreases
in front

- IS -

3) Ceiling:- The cej.ling of the airplane continues to be raisecL
unt i l the air in fron-c of the ce.rburet or fur!lisheci -by the supercharger has becoue rarefiea to an exter..t ':Vhi~h wC"Jld [.ave served
to j".lst barely sl:.stair. t: e airplane rlithou.t the supercharger .
The forego ing considerations are ap;>licaDle to airpl&nes
v1hen making flights :or tne pu::-pose of practical com}Jarison.
In Figure 46 , as sho "n, the avera.ge ascension curve s of a 1000
h .p. giant airplane, ~'ith a.nd w7.thout a s-..:perc:.targe:::.', bu".:; v.-it~l
approximately 'the same total weight. For the f1igh"u sho·.m in
Figure 47 the additional output of the s"-lperC~b.rged. airp:i.ane
was 130 kg. > Wh~CL c orresponds to t~e additio~al weight of t~e
two supercharge~s with accessories.
In this cQnnec~ion, the use of a gas turbine* for driviJg
the supercharger Via", &1 so advocated. T:18 gas turbine vIas to use
the exhaust gases of one 01' more main engines . Theoretically
there seems to be nothing to preven".:; this . 'r~e available energy
also appears to be sufficient e ven ·,vith a tur~j.ne of moJ.erate
efficiency . However , tile additiona:i. weight and the lac~ of simplicity of the er.gine plant of the a~rplane are disadvan".:;ageo"Js.
Difficulties mCl.Y a130 be expe ct ed from 'the back pressure on the
exhaust gases at the exhaust valves.
The use of a steam turbine instec:,d of the gas turbine might
be considered . The heat of tl:1e exhi::l.l'..st gases would be sufficient in this case also . But 3. suitable boiler and condenser are
lacking. The airp'lane supe rcD,cu'ger is a child of tile wal' ,
It
was born of the urgent need. of conG inually raisjng the ce il ing
of the airplanes higher a:lci ever hi6~1er, and of the necessity of
using ordinary airplane engines in ",0 doing. 'l'hese two cond.itions are largely rerlloved in peace ·c7.nle . Fcr peace time flyi::tg
altitudes of f:rorr. 3 to 4 krr.• wi~_l suffice, and for these altitudes the super-com:;Jression and supe'-dimension en5ire is sufficient . There mav however 1:)e a :lotaole fu".;ure for the blower o-c
supercharger with or without e:~h2.us~ tu.:-';Jir"e for large engjnes**
in g i ant airplanes. We might o.lso p1&n for t:1e fl.lC;Ule a very
large seaplane i th a trelfler1d.oLls speed., i~ic~ v:J(;uld fly at great
altitudes for the purp ose of utiliz.ing the dim::.nishcd ail' resistance at such heights. With such c. seapla:l8 the pilot and
the engine s i~'ould be in an airt igh t c omp3.rtment in ,'l1:ic~ the air
would be maintained at about grol:nd level pre.::3sul'e . These airplanes would be able to fly at alti"
Gudes of abOut 10 to 12 km.
and attain a speed of 250 l(m/hr . and over> so that they ~vou l d be
able to make the trip from Germany to America in le ss than a day.

*

See "Zeitschrift " 1919, ::- .418, and "J.Juftpostll 1919, Nos. 13
and 13 .

**

German Reic~1s patent No . 204630 (A. B{),chi) "Zeitschrift f~r das
ges, Turbinen7Vessen" 1809, p . 3~3,

- 1'( -

S UMMARY.
Airplane st:.percr.argers and problems connected therewith
are discussed: Decrease of the density of the air ~ith increasing altitude, causes of ~he decrease in engine power \7ith increasing altitude, devices for ~aintaining constant eng ine power,
supel'-compression and super-dimension engines, the airplane supe rcharger, drive and control of the supercharge r, the overloading capacity of the engine by means of the supercharger, the
pressure compensations at the carburetor, and fuel syste~s.
Various superchargers constructed by Schwade, in Erfurt; Brown ,
Boveri & Co., in Mai.1nheim; the A.E.G. in. Hennigsdorf; and the
Siemens Schucke rt Werke in Siemenstadt, are discussed, as are
also the airscre w~ with fixed pitch, airscrews v.ith variable
pitch, by Prof . Reis sner, and closing with a consideration of
the technical aviation problems, plans, and prospects.

Translated by the Office of Naval Intelligence, Navy Department.
Checked by L. ' M. Griffith, N.A.C.A.

