N il 52022

TECHNICAL NOTES.
NATIONAL ADVISORY

CO~~ITTEE

FOR AERONA
UTICS,

No.2a.

THE

PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORDING OF SMALL MOTIONS.

By

F. H. Norton, Physicist,
Aerodynrunicnl Laboratory, N. A. C. A.,
Langley Field. Va.

-,

.

I

Novemb er, 1920.

NATIONAL ADVISORY COIOOTTEE FOR AERONAUTICS

TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 22
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORDING OF SMALL MOTIONS .
By

F. H. Norton, Physicist,
Aerodynamical Laboratory, N. A. C. A.,
Langley Field, Va.

The problem of recording small and perhaps rapid motions
often comes up in research work and instrument design, and the pen
and lever are often used where an optical method would be far superior. The latter method is not more used, probably because so little
definite information is available on its design and possibilities.
For this reason, the present report bas been written fran data obtained at the Field Station of the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics in the hops that it may contri buts some new information
on the subj e ct.
The optical method of recording is more complicated and requires greater skill in manipulation than does the mechanical one, so
that where the latter will do the work satisfactorily, the optical
method will have no advantages. On the other hand , when it is desired
to make the instrument more compact or to greatly reduce the friction
or moment of inertia of the moving parts, the optical method is immensely superior, and in many cases is a necessity. For example, the
line traced on a film will have about 1/10 the width of a pen traced
line, thus reduCing the width of the film t o 1/10 f or the same accuracy. and the friction of a pivoted mirror is much l e ss than 1/100 of
the friction of a lever and pen, designed to do the same work. Also
a photographic record io much more easily d~licated than a pen and
ink record.
The Light Source.
The positive carbon of a direct current arc is the most
intense source of light, and is very suitable for laboratory apparatus
where weight and bulk are of little importance. The best resul te are
obtained when the image of the arc is focused on a blackened slit.
A water cell should be placed in the path of the rafS in order that
the slit may not be overheated by the intense beam. A sketch ot the
general assembly is shown in Fig. 1, and a cross section of the slit
in Fig. 2. The width of the slit depends on the fineness and intensity
of the record desired, .01 to .10 of a' mm. being the usual r~ge.

- 2 Where direct current is unavailable a ooncentrated filament nitrogen
lamp can be used in place of the arc, but is much less satisfactory, as
the intensitr 1s less and it is impossible to evenly illuminate the slit.
For portable instruments the moat satisfaotory light source is
a low voltage flash light bulb, using the filament itself as a line
source. As the filaments in the ooromercial lamps are S shaped when
viewed from the front, some speCial lamps were obtaineadW1th a straight
filameut and a dull black bead to prevent secondary reflectione. One
of these lamps 1s shown in Fig. 3. This source of light is very satisfactorr as it gives a narrow and intense image , but in some cases
where high period vibrations have to be recorded it is necessary to
burn the lamps above their normal voltage thus reducing their life to
only a fewminates. The deSign of the lamp holder for a portable instr~ent ie quite important as the lamp must be held rigid, and a good
electrical contact maintained ~der any condition of vibration or jar.
The lamp must also be easily changed and the new filament should come
in the same place as the old. As the filaments are not always in the
same position with respect to the lamp base, each lamp should be
mounted in an adjustable socket so that tbe filament will be in its
correct pOSition, thus allowing changing lamps and sockets quickly.
The lamp holder should also have means for adjusting the focus. A
cross section of a holder that fulfills these requirements is shown in
Fig. 4.
The Qptical System.
The essentials of the optical system consist of a light
source, a mirror or prism for transmitting motion to the emergent beam,
and a means for bringing the rays to a focus on the film. Any one
of the methods shown in Figs. 5 to 11 can be ussd, but some have
greater advantages than others. The deSirable feature8 are obViously
first,brilliance of the image. aeconi, large magnifioation of movement; and third, a small sized image.
Referring to Fig. 5. the movement of the image, X = J ,
2 0: , where ~ is the angle of rotation of the mirror and.R.
is the distanoe from the mirror to the film.

-1

tan

The size of the image, 51 = S
size of the object.
The total light in the image, Ll

'2 - 11

whera S is the

13

= (Xl + HZ) Lz

tan

-1 (

2

leO

d
)
:13

o

where L2 is the total caDdle powe~ of the source and Xl is the efficiency of the lens and Kz that of the mirror; d is the diameter of the
lena.

-

-

--~~~---~- -

-

-

-

- 3 -

In the same way, for Fig. 6 .

x ;;:

(1. 1 +

.i z) tao

2 a

.R l
PG+.R 3 tan- 1
L 1 ;;: (K1 + KG) Lz

180

o

In Fig. 7:

X=:(.k\+i.'2) tan '2 a:
51 ::; S

!l
£3

180

o

In Fig. 8:
X

.R 1

=

ta..'l Z

ex:

In Fig. 9:

.x ::
S1 =

i'2 n tan '2 a:
S

-fa

-

£1 -1 (d)
tan
'2 Jl.
180

o

1

Where n 1s the number of reflections on the moving mirror.

- 4 -

In Fig. 10:
X ::

(1? 3 +
5

-f 4) tan 2 cr

-R4

.e{
leO

o

In Fig. 11:
X == £3

8

1

:: S

tan-1(

J_)

2 ~l

----~

180

The val us s of K and. K2 are given in the f 011 om. ng tabl e f.or 01 ean .
polished surfaces. These values are decreased 10 to 20% b~ dust or
moist'UI'e.
For Yellow Light.
Thin simple Lens

KI

=

Glass backed by silver

~

:: .82 - .Be

Silver Surface

Kz=

.93

Magnaliuw 69Al,31Mg

Kz=
Kz=

,83

Stellite Surfaoe

~

-.95

,'SB

Method 1 is very ccmmonly used in laboratory apparatus, but
has the slight disadvantage in portable instruments of requiring a.
rather loog system for the deflection obtained; The next arrangement
gives a small image but will allcw only a. slight deflection before
coming out of the field of the lens. In Method 3 the light passes
twice through the lens, 90 that the latter need onl~ be of half the
focal length required in the other methods. If the mirror is placed
close to the lens, a very compact and satisfactor~ system is obtain9d,
baving the advantage that the moving mirror can be placed in an a.irtight chamber, with the lena as a window. A modification of this
method that is considera.bly used consists in moving the whole lens,
whose r~ plano surface is Silvered, although this greatly increases

the moment of inertia of the moving parts. M
ethod 4 i9 very simple,
but the concave mirror is heavier than a. plane one and the definiti on
is i~erior t o that obtained with a lens. Method 5 can be used when
it is desired to obtain a record of a very slight angular movement.
It is not advisable t o use more than four reflections on the moving
mirror as the definition and brilliancy of the image falloff very
rapidly as the number of reflections is increased. Methods 6 and 7
offer no particular advantages over those already described.
The lenses may be satisfaotorily made of the simple planoconvex type, but if critioal definition is required a corrected photographic doublet should be used. The plane mirrors are satisfactorily
made of silvered microsc ope c over glasses cut t o the right size with
a diamond. Recently good success haa been bad with polished stellite
mirrors. These have the great advantage of eliminating the surface
reflection fr cm the glass, wh'-ch in the silvered mirrol's is at times
very annoying. Stellite seams to hold its polish well and although
it is yat only an experiruant, looks very promising.
By using a powerful are, illWlination enough can be obta.ined
from a 1 WID . square mirror to trace a curve with oscillations at the
rate of several thousand per second.. When using a flashlight bulb,
a 10-in, distance from light to mirror, and a mirror 3~. square, sufficient il1\lIllination is obtained when burning the lalllp at normal voltage to obtain a readable record when the oscillations are 1 em. long
on the film, and occur at a. rate of 20 per second, The lamp must be
burned at 50% over voltage however to obtain a strong enough record
for satisfactory reprOduction under the ~ame conditions.

As the image fr~ the law~ filament or illuminated slit is
a line perpendicular to the axis of the film drum, a slit must be
placed before the film, normal to the image in order that a point of
light may fallon the film surface, The width of this slit may be anywhere frQm 0.1 to 0.02 of a m.m. depending on the fineness of the desired record and the intensity of the image. The slit should be constructed in the same manner as the one shown in Fig. 2, although it
will be considerably longer and it should be placed as close as possible to the film.
The light from the source should be so restricted that it
will just cover the lens or mirror, as a~ scattered light will fog the
film. This restriction must be accomplished without introducing any
reflecting surfaces that would form secolldary images. Fig. 12 shows a
satisfactory method of doing this by a number of carefully blaCked diaphragms, It is well to keep the angle between the en~ering beam, and
the beam to the film, as small as possible.
When a lena is used, its axis must be turned away from the
light beam enough to throw ihe images from its surfaces awa.y from the
slit, as they wo~d otherwise fog the film. If, as is usually the
case, the lens is plano-convex, the angle between the lens surface aDd
the surface of the mirror is given by the folmowing expression.

a

= . 1 tan- 1
2

9: + (3

f

(Fig. 13)

I

I

j

I

whe~e

CC
d

=
=

.R. =

angle between planes of lens and mirror.
diameter of lena .
distance fr om lens face t o slit.

jJ= angle to bring edge of image sli ghtly away fram the slit,
its value may be 1° to 3°.
The plane of the mirror is of c ourse, normal to the bisector
of the entering and emergent beams.
Mirror

~ounting .

The ori ginal motion whicb it is de sired t o reo or~ is almost
always rectilinear. so that it must be transfo~~ed into rotary motion
of the mirror staff. This may be accomplished in many waye, acme of
whicb are described below. The motion orj.gin3 tee in a. diaphragm in
the majority of casee, but sometimes it may come from a flat spring
as in the N.A.C.A. acceleromete~.
In Fig. 14 is shown the mounting of the mirror in the Knott
sonograpb which is used to analyze musical sounds. Tbe mirror is
mounted on a tbin steel strip stretched tightly, and a strut, rigj.dly
connected to the diaphragm rests on the back of the mirror slightly t o
one side of the center. The slight motions of the mica diaphragm are
thus transmitted in an alwost frictionless manner to the mirror. This
method gives a very bigh natura.l period and is satisfactory for its
:purpose, but tlle angular deflection is too small for a. ccmpact instrument and the zero i9 not apt to be constant.
The recorOjng air speed meter used by the National Physical
Laboratory (Fig. 15) employs a Perry twisted strip in o~der to convert the motion of the diaphragm into a rotary mot ion of the mirror.
The magnification obtained in this way is quite large, but for structural reasons this method is not as sa.tisfactory as s~~e of the others.
The airspeed meter constructed by the National Advisory
Committee for Aerona~tics t o record the fluctuati ons of flow in wind
t~e18 (Fig. 16) has a mi~ror mounted on knife edges a~d is connected to the diaphragm and beld in place by a light sp:?ing str";~.
~he position of the mirror is adjueted by mOTing the knife edge s ockets in or out by a screw paSSing through the face of the in6t~t~ent.
This instr.ument proved very useful for laboratory 'Use but would. not
stand heavy shocks, as the mirror holder would then be displaced from
its sockets.
After this instrument bad been tried out. another one was
deSigned and construoted f or use in flight, as shown in Figs. l.? and
18. Here the mirror was mounted on a light staff with 60° conical

,
pivots at its ends, A short ha!'denad screw passing through a bushing
in the diaphragm transmi. tted the motion to the mirl"'or. A fine watch
hair spr ing held the mi:r.ro!' staff up against this screw, the sensitivity being changed by eccentric soCk3t sorews whicb raised or lowered the mirror. This instrU4len·ii workEld very satisfacto2.'::ly, and a
large nUDlber are nO\'V be:A.flg constl'1.1.c ·~E\d to record. the pl'ess"llX'e at various points on the surfa.ces of an ai!'pla.ne in fEght. This same mirrox mounting is also used in the N.A.C .a. accelei:'cmeter descl'i bed in
Report No. 100.
One of tbe most refined optical recording instruments ever
constructed is the Pbonediek designed by Prof. D. C. Miller, of the
Case School of Applied Science, for obtaining the wave forma of sound.
The mirror is fastened to a steel shaft mounted in jeweled bearings
and a very fine silk or platinum fibre is wound around a drum on the
staff, one end being fastened to tbe diapbragm and the other to ~:. ,
light spring. Because of tbe very low weight of the moving parts a
natural period of nea.rly 10,000 V:;'bl's,tiona per second is ob·i;ained.
A. diapbrago of this ix:.a~rUllent is shown in Fig. 19.
Film Holde!'.
In order to obtain a record from a light spot moving ~p and
down in a straight line, a seneitized ~~face must be mo~ed, preferably w.itb uniform motion, a~oss tbis line. This can be done, ~G
in some of the older instrume4ts, by letting a plate cove down under
gravity, its speed baing contro:A.led by a dasbpot. Wh:~.le tb;;'s method
is all rigbt for s~ort records taken in the laborator,y, the appe~atus
1s very bulk7. A long record can be taken by reeling a film from one
drun to anotber bebj.nd tbe slit, as is cione in tbe R.A,Fo accaleTometer. t'r-iile tbis method gives a long reco~d in a very compact instrument, it is almost imposs;ble to obtain a ~~iform spsed, as tbe
diameter of the driving drun is always changing. A thi:t'd metbod is
to place the film smoothly on the sV.l'face of a cylinder wb5.ch is revolved at uniform speed. This cannot give a very long ~ecord on one
drum without great size and. weigbt, but it will give a smooth azlIi
unif orm speed.
After some experimsotiIlg, it was found that a revolving
film drum encased in a light tight holder was the moat satiSfactory
as this gave an even speed wi tbout jerks, and at the end. of a f'i1m
the whole bolder co·\\ld be cbanged in a few seconds. An assem~J.y
drawing of a drUDl of this type is shown in Fig. 20, and photographg
in l!'igs. 21, 22 & 23. The film iss traightened and t:i.ghtened hy a.
pair of rubber rollers, - so that it is unnecessary to touch tbe film
surfaces with the fingers, a.nd the f1lm is stretched smoothJ.y and
tightly on the drum. In order to tell bow much film ha.s been used,
a set of figures is stamped aro'Qlld. the top of the re.olving drun and
a red window allows them to be seen without fogging the film. AD
automatic shutter is attached to the slit on the drum and is normally
closed by a spring. When the dl-un is put in posi tion on its instru-

ment a pin opens the shutter, thus allowing a quick interchange of
drums without danger of fo gging, or of l eaving the slide in when
taking a record.
The h older, as well as the instrument case should be, of
course, absolutely light tight, even in t he bright sun, and the surface of the drum and the inside of the holder should be coated with
dull optical black t o prevent reflections. As far as possible all
fastenings should be simple and quick acting, as any small loose parts
are hard t o find in the dark room.
Driving Motor.
The recording drum is usually driven by an escapement cl ock,
when the rate of turning is sl ower than once an hour as is generally
the case in meteorological instruments. The cl ock, for the optical
method, may be very small, as the pen friction is eliminated. In the
laborat ory the most satisfactory method is an electric motor drive,
the speed being easily varied by a rheostat, or if very c onstant speed
is desired a synchronous motor can be used
The problem that c cmes up in aeronautics is more difficult
t o solve, as here it is desired t o have a light, portable instrument
with a comparatively rapid dri~e (1 R.P. M and a constant speed un.)
der vibration or extreme changes in accreleration. For the NvArC.AG
accelerometer a gover.oor-controlled cl ock was constructed as sh own in
Report No ~ 100. The governor was built as shown in Fig . 24 , s o that
any downward accelerations, whiCh would tend to increase the bearing
friction , would at the same time act on the lower friction disc of the
governor and relieve s ome of the fricti on on the brake. In this clock
the weight of this part was not great enough t o secure perfect regulation but it is much better than on an uncompensated mechanism.
While this clock gave perfectly satisfactory service, it required several seconds to r ea ch its steady speed, and required winding f or every record. As it is necessary t o have a sourCe of electricity at hand for t he light, a swall direct current motor was desi gned
to drive the dr~ through two worms, the motor running at 2000 R.P. M
.
An electric governcr of the Leeds and Northrup type is used t o keep
the speed constant . Only-an experimental motor bas, as yet, been
c onstr~ted, and complete testa have not beeu made, but so far the resul ts are quite promising, the motor starting and. stopping almost
instantly. A photograph of this motor is shown in Fig . 25.

- 9 OPERATION AND ADJUSTMENT OF RECORDING

INSTR~~NTS.

The mirror should be p~ovided with an adjustment for bringing the image on the vertical slit, and also for raising the image up
or down the slit. The lamp should first be moved along its axis until
the maximum definition of the image is obtained on the plane of the
film, and the image should be adjusted correctly up and down as well
as sideways, then all parts should be clamped securel, in place. When
all adjustments are properly made, a sharp spot of light with no diffusion around its edges should be projected on the film.
When placing the film on the drum it is better not to touch
the surface in any way, as abrasion and finger marks are very prominent on such a transparent negative. The jOint in the film should
be placed opposite the slit in the h older so that a complete record
can be obtained around the drum. The exposed film can be developed
in any contrast developer such as pyro. and should be kept in the solution as long as possible without fogging. Prints can be made directly from the films on hard paper, or if a black line is desired the
record can first be transferred to a proCeSS plate. A record taken
with a recording yawmeter is shown in Fig. 26. This record is enlarged about eight times fran the original negative, and still shows
as much sharpness as the usual pen and iIlk record.
Conclusions.
Fr.am the work that has been done on ~ptical recording instr1.llllents, it is clear that thi.s method ia far more satisfactory than
the recording pan, in ccmpactness, in high natural period, and in
eliminatioD of fricti on. The expense of construction is little more
in the first case than in the second, and the optical method can be
made fully as fool proof as the mecbanical oDe ia as far as actually
taking the record is concerned. The development and reproduction of
the record is an added complication, but the ease of duplicating the
records is a. decided advantage.
•

-------------~~------------------

FIG . 23 .

RECORDING DRUM .

FIG. 18.

RECORDING AIR SPEED METER WITH CAP
AND LENS REMOVED.

FIG . 22.- RECORDING DRUM CASE.

A,

. ..

FIG. 26.- A RECORD OBTA INED WITH A RECORDING YAWMETER.
T he r eproduction is enlarged about 8X from the o riginal film.

FIG. 25. - CONSTANT SPEED DRIV IN G MOTOR.

FIG. 21.-RECORDING DRUM HOLDER ASSEMBLY .

