	

7
— 1irv
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

CASr :TE
cc
7:

2'7.

TIN SOLDERING OF ALUMINUM AND ITS ALLOYS. 
By
Prof. Gino Gallo.

Trayislated. from
T Rendicont j. deli' Istituto Sperinenta1e AeronauicO, ii
February, 1921.

L
0.
??iv-j
Ito	
bOual

October, 1921. 	
db
pC

NM

TIN SOLDERING OF ALUMINUM AND ITS ALLOYS.*
By
Prof. Gino Gallo.
As is known, aluminum and its alloys can only be welded autogenously or by other very special means, with recourse to fusing
and the interposition of alloys with other metals.
Aside from the fact that the autogenous weldings of aluminum
and its alloys have intrinsic defects inherent in their nature,
like blow-holes, blisters, etc., they cause a deterioration of
the mechanical properties of the metal and, In the event of the interposition of other metals, the latter become the seats of electrolytic reactions, with continuous and rapid change, in addition
to the othr important circumstances that these weldings are only
possible between pieces of the same metal alloy and are therefore
impossible with other metals. Consequently the field of application of the light metals is necessarily much restricted.
The author considered the possibility of rendering general
the joining of the light metals, by having recourse to soft

sd-

dering with tin, as practiced with all the other metals.
But, as every one knows, aluminum cannot be soldered in this
way, since tin, or the alloy of tin and lead, will not adhere to
* From "Rendiconti deli' Istituto Sperimentale Aeronautico,' 1 Febrary , 1921, pp. 43-50.
A recent article by L Guillet and M. Gasner, published in the
"Revue de Metallurgie," (Vol. XVII, 1920, p. 351) on nickel-plating
aluminum, influenced me to publish the present article on a process patented by the author in 1916 and which, in its fundamental
part, was inspired by the same principle as that adopted by the
above-named authors.

-2its surface. On the other hand, in order to render possible in
every instance, the replacement of steel or of other heavy metals
with light metals, it was necessary to find the method for

joining

with soft solder the various members of different structure, which
are now employed especially in technical aeronautics, without recourse to profound modifications in the fundamental principles now
serving as the basis for such constructions. Herewith, it was
possible to obtain automatically any considerable reduction in the
dead weight and consequently much increase in the efficiency of
the airplane.
The method adopted for solving the problem consisted in the
galvanic

application to

thesurf ace of the light-metal parts to be

soldered, of a layer of another metal, which, without re-acting
electrolytically on the aluminum, adheres strongly to the surface
to which it is applied, and is, on the other hand, adapted to receive the soft solder, thus making it possible to solder together
two pieces of aluminum, or to solder aluminum to some other metal,
in the ordinary way.
After various trials, it was found that the metal answering
these conditions best, as well as being the most economical, is
iron. But the electrolytic deposit of this, as well as of other
metals, on aluminum, in the form of a uniform and adherent layer,
does not give good results with the ordinary methods of cleaning
the metal with acids or alkalis.
Only when, instead, recourse is had to a mechanical process of

- 3 scouring the surface, is a well adhering deposit of another metal
on aluminum or its alloys rendered possible, because, under these
conditions, the adherence is due exclusively to the "grappling"
properties of the metal deposited in the cavities mechanically prcduced on the surface of the aluminum.
It was found convenient to produce the mechanical abrasion by
roughening the metal with emery cloth of medium fineness (No. 0),
preferably in two directions normal to each other. After simple
washing in running water, it was immediately immersed in the electrolytic bathe*
A suitable electrolytic bath may be prepared by dissolving 20
grams of ammonium oxalate in 500 cc. of hot distilled water, and
10 g. of iron sulphate in another 500 cc. of hot water. The hot solution of iron sulphate is then poured into the solution of ammoniu'e
bxalate, giving a volume of one liter, and allowed to cooL
The solution may be used even after it becomes turbid and is
only discarded when the electrolytic deposit is no longer satisfactory.
The solution must be prepared and kept in a container of glass
Or porcelain or enameled iron and must not be left in contact witI
the iron of the anodes when not in use, since it is no. longer serviceable, if it becomes too heavily charged with iron.
* L.
same
sand
sure

The intensity of the current must not exceed 0.5 ampere per
Guillet and M. Gasner, in the work referred to, arrived at the
conclusions and employed a sand blast for roughening, using
sifted through a sieve with 0.2 mm. meshes, and under a presvarying from 600 to 1500 grams per sq.cm.

-4,.square decimeter of the cathode, with a difference of 4 to 6 volts
in potential.
The anode consists of ordinary soft iron. In order to obtain
a uniform deposit, it is important for the positive iron electrode
to be symmetrical with reference to the piece of aluminum Or alloy
serving as the negative pole, so

as--to

maintain a nearly uniform

cLi.E.

tance between the anode and cathode. Thus, for example, in order
to deposit iron on the inside of an aluminum tube, it is sufficient

to introduce into the latter, as anode, an iron wire, held in place
by a cork at the top of the tube. For making a deposit on the out
aide of a tube, recourse is had to a spiral of the same iron wire
outside the tube. Lastly, for objects of various shapes, -it is best
to make a sheet iron container of a shape- similar to that, of the
object to be plated, in which case the container itself is the poeitive pole.
Vhen the object of light alloy, to be soldered, can be immersed
in the bath with its principal axis vertical and has;-no outside projections, it can be hung directly in the bath and subjected to the

the ease of irregular objects or when they must he
immersed horizontally, the precipitate formed in the solution set-

electrolysis. In

tles on the surface to be plated, thereby preventing, at some points..
the eletrolytio deposit. In this event, there must be a continuous
circulation or a suitable agitation of the liquid.
For suspending the object, iron or aluminum wire is used, but
never copper. The operation is performed at the ordinary
ture.

tempera-

- 5 When the surface of the cathode has acquired a dull gray iron
color, which takes from half an hour to two hours, the piece is
removed from the bath, jmrdiately washed in running water and
dried by wiping.
If the surface, instead., shows yellow streaks Or shiny black
spots, or bare spots of aluminum, the operation is not successful,
which may be due to a too intense current or to the exhaustion of
the solution.
The surface of a light alloy, after being plated.- in the above
manner, can be soldered with tin, either to other pieces of the
same metal, treated. in the same manner, o f to other metals.
For this purpose, the surface- of the electrol y tic deposit is
moistened with hydrochloric acid completel y neutralized with ainc,
Or better by smearing the surface with a thin coat of one of the

ordinary soldering pastes existing in commerce.
After this is done, the objects to be tinned are dipped into
melted.. tin (or a soldering alloy of about 40 parts lead and 60
parts tin), until they have acquired the temperature of the bath,
and then, if possible, the surfaces to be joined are clamped together until the alloy hardens, without cooling by water. For soldering a soft metal tube to a steel pipe, after immersion in the
tin, the steel pipe is pushed inside the tube and allowed to COOi
If, instead, successive solderings must be made, after dipping
the

the points described,
surfaces as to be soldered are moistened

with spent hydrochloric acid or with paste, and the soldering is

-6-then done with a blowpipe or gasoline torcL vrith the application of
ordinary soldering alloy.

When the soldering has been well done, it will withstand a
pull equal to that of soldered iron.
If the surfaces are to be simply tinned, it is sufficient to
immerse them, after pickling, in melted tin and then wipe off the
excess tin with a rag.
The results of these experiments were summed up in a patent
granted in Italy, May 18, 1916, and extended successively in France
England, Belgium, America and Japan.
The accompanying illustrations show some of the results easily obtained by this process of soldering: the construction of a
fra2nework consisting of parallel tubes of light metal connected by
an obliquely bent tube of another metal (Fig. 1) and how it is pos
solder tubes of light metal to steel pipes (Fig. 2). In

sible to

the latter case, an innovation was introduced by the writer in the
method of attaching the tubes to the pipes, in that the tube of
light metal surrounds the steel pipe and not inversely, as had been
the custom. The tube, forced on by conressiofl, rests against a
suitable shoulder on the outside of the pipe, so that, after it is
on, it forms a continuous surface, with the consequent elimination
of any projection, as in ordinary unions which, on account of the
great speed now attained by airplènes, exert considerable influence
on the head resistance. This method of joining also has another
advantage. On account of the larger coefficient of expansion of

- aluminum in comparison with steel, the aiuminum, which is expanded
more by the heat required for soldering, hugs the steel pipe hard.e:
on cooling and thus assures a still better adhesion. In fact, tensue tests with 30 .x 27 rmi. tubes of light metal, with a breaking
strength of 48 kg. per sq.m. and a ductility of 12%, soldere& in
the above manner for a distance of 30 mm. to pipes of 0.5 mm. steel,
resulted. in tearing the steel pipes, instead, of separating the sQldered, parts.
For illust±ating some applications of this method of soldering
in the field of aeronautics, we can show how, by this process, it
is possible and easy, without fundamental modifications of the present construction methods, to substitute light metals for other materials in constructing, for example, the framework of airplanes
md airships, in soldering sheet metal for the cockpits, in making
and repairing craxikcasee, and, lastly, instead of wood, for wing
spars and ribs with suitable sections for increasing their moment
of inertia, improving the penetrating properties of the machine
and reducing the head resistance from friction to a minimum.
In Figs. 3 aid 4 is shown an airship girder made of duralumin
tubing and braced with iron tubing, tin soldered,- by the method in
question and then subjected: to compression tests;.
The principal characteristics of this girder, in comparison
with a similar girder of steel tubing, are given in the following
table:

-8-

Characteristics

Girder of all steel
tubing with braces
of steel tubing;
tin soldered.

Girder of duralumin:
: tubing with braces
:
of steel tubing; 	
:
tin soldered. 	

Main tubes

Equilateral triax;: Equilateral trian: gle 200 mm. on a	 : gle 200 mm. on a
: side
side
: Steel,	 30 x 0.5 rfm
: Duralurnmfl,
1.2 im.:
30 x

Bracing tubes	

: Steel, 10 x 1 mm.

Length of girder	

:

Shape of girder	

Total weight of girder
Weight per running meter:
:
Breaking strength by 	
compression

Steel, 10 x 1 mm.

4 m.

4m.

5.95 kg.
1.49 kg.	
6190 kg.	

8.47 kg.
2.12 kg.
5875 kg.

:
:

Lastly, the possibility of covering aluminum and its alloys
with a uniform coating of tin is of considerable practical importance. It is known that when two different metals come in contact
with each other in the same solution, there is established. between
them a difference of potential, just so much the greater as the
metals themselves are more distant from each other in the so-called.
electro-chemical series of the elements ) whith begins at the positive end with the alkaline metals and then becomes negative toward
the non-metals. Given thus, the following electro-oheiflical series
of the elements:
K •	 +	 .:.
1.24
Mg
1.03
Al
Mn "	 0.82
Zn n.	 0.51
0.16
Cd.
IT	
It	

11	

Volt

Fe + 0.09 Volt
Co - 0.02
Ni
0.02
Sn It 0.09
Pb 11	 0.10
IT

it
It
It

It

1

H
it

it 0.25

Sb - 0.38 Volt
Bi" 0.50
As	 IT 0. 55	
Cu " 0.59	
Hg 1 1.03	
It
II

II

Ag '

1.06	

11

-9it is obse rved that

aluminum and copper are very far from each other

and, while aluminum

is strongly electropositive, copper is electro-

negative. It folloi

s., therefore, that whenever aluminum comes in

contact with copper

or any alloy of copper in the presence of any

solution, which may

even be simply the moisture in the air, an

electrolytic couple is formed., in which the aluminum functions as
the positive pole, that is, as the soluble metal, and will (as likewise its alloys) undergo rapid corrosion . This fact has been confirmed many times in practice, in cases of simple contact of an
alloy of aluminum with brass or bronze.* It attained considerable
Proportions when the metallia contact took place in the presence
of sea water. Now, covering aluminum (or one of its alloys) with a
strongly adhering coat of tin, asby this process, completely eliminates this harmful electrolytic action, since tin is electronegative, like copper, and these two metals do not react electrolytically on each other. It is accordingly necessary to take account of
these phenomena in practice and of the posaibility of using the
light metal, even in contact wiith copper alloys, when the light
met al has been properly tinned.
* Aluminum radiators, supported on bronze brackets, have, in some
cases, been completely perforated. Aluminum fuel tanks with brass
lugs rapidly corrode at the points of contact.

Translated. by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics..,

Fq./.

,Ci•g

.c)

