vO Y
NO. I-W

c

y

REPORT No. 68

THE EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON THE
STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS

NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
FOR AERONAUTICS

FILE 00
To be

IIUIIII"'.

the flI of till N~on
dvisory C rrni

for Aeronautics
Wllihington, O. C
PREPRINT FROM FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1ll2O.

REPORT No. 68

THE EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON THE
STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS

NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
FOR AERONAUTICS

PREPRINT FROM FIFTH ANNUAL REPORT

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1920.

i

REPORT No. 68
THE EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON THE STRENGTH
OF AIRPLANE WOODS
Prepared in the Forest Products Laboratory of the Forest Service
(In cooperation with the University of Wisconsin)
BY

T. R. C. WILSON, Engineer in Forest Products

3

CONTENTS.
Summary of general conclusions .............................................................................•
Necessity for kiln drying ...... . .......................................................................... .
Previous investigations . ......................... .. ...................................................... .
Adoption of specifications and beginning and scope of present work . ..... . ........ " ........................ .
Basis of tests and comparisons ........................................................................... .
Mechanical te ts and the properties determined [rom them ................................................ .
Preparation of material. .... . ............................................................................ .
Methods of anal ysis ...... . ......... . .................................................................... .
Discussion by species .... . ............................................................................ " ..
Sitka spruce . . ...................................................................................... .
Douglas fir . ....................... . .................... . ............................................ .
We tern white pine .............................................. . ................................... .
White ash ......................................................... . ................................ .
Port Orford cedar ............................... . ................................................... .
Bald cypress ............... . ....................................................................... .
Western hemlock ............................................................ . ...................... .
White and Norway pines ............................................................................. .
White fir ................................... . ....................................................... .
African and Central American mahoganies ............................................................ .
Black walnut . . ..................................................................................... .
Sugar maple .................................. . ..................................................... .
Yellow birch .............................. . ........................................................ .
Oaks ............................................................................................... .
5

PSg<\

9

10
10
11
11

13
15
17
20
21
39
47
53

60
61
61
61
63
64
65
66
67
68

FOREWORD.

This monograph is one of a series contributed by the Forest Products Laboratory, which
is maintained at Madison, Wis. , by the Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with the University of Wisconsin.
The investigations described have been carried out with the aid of funds provided by the
War and avy Departments, and the results have been used by these departments in connection with specifications for the kiln drying of airplane material.
The author desires to make acknowledgment to Mr. H. D. Tiemann, specialist in kiln drying,
and to Mr. J . L Newlin, in charge section of timber mechanics, whose extensive investigations
of kiln drying and the strength of timber have been basic in planning the tests and analyzing
the data de cribed and presented. Messrs. L . A. Welo, C. A. Plaskett, R. P . A. Johnson, and
H . J. R o enthal aided in preparation of material, superintendence of te ts and tabulations
and analy is of data and their persevering, painstaking, and loyal efforts are acknowledged.
It is also desired to acknowledge cooperation of numerous lumber associations and companies in furnishing material for test.
7

REPORT No. 68.
THE EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON THE STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.
By the Forest Products Laboratory.

SUMMARY OF GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.

The general conclusions stated below are the outcome of a series of tests which included 26
species, approximately 100 kiln runs, and over 100,000 mechanical tests. The series was undertaken in cooperation with the War and Navy Departments, and in continuance of earlier
investigations on the basis of which the Forest Products Laboratory had drafted, for the War
Department, Signal Corps Specification 20500, General Kiln-drying Process for Airplane Stock. 1
This specification was based on the results of tests of Sitka spruce and white ash material
representing three preliminary kiln runs at the laboratory, and on the general lmowledge of
kiln drying and the properties of wood which the researches of the laboratory in earlier years
had developed. The material for the fu'st tests had been arranged for before the United States
entered the war, as it was antecipated that kiln drying of airplane stock would become
necessary; and the preliminary runs antedated the adoption by the Government of its aircraft
program. Signal Corps Specification 20500 was submitted to the War Department in July, 1917.
While its adoption as an emergency measure was believed entirely justified, additional tests
of its safety for spruce and ash and of it applicability to many other species were considered
essential. It was desirable also to ascertain the possibility of using more rapid processes.
The present monograph presents results of the tests made for these purposes.
The general conclusions reached are:
1. That wood may have its trength pl'opertie , particularly toughness or resistance to
shock, quite seriously damaged without any visible evidence of such damage. Hence, appearance of the material can not, where maximum tl'ength is essential, be accepted as the sole
basis of judgment of the effect of a drying proce on wood.
2. That the effect of a given proce s i not the same on all species of wood.
3. That apparently a given process may be entirely safe for some but quite detrimental
to other material of a species.
4. That proper kiln drying produces material fully equal in all strength properties to that
resulting from air drying under the mo t favorable conditions.
5. That specification 20500-A of the Bureau of Aircraft Production (Table 1 or 2 as specified) can in most cases be expected to produce material fully equal to air-dried.
6. That best results (with respect to strength properties) on Douglas fir will result from
the use of somewhat milder drying conditions than those laid down in Specification 20500-A
(Table 1). Table 2 of this pecification (temperatures 105 0 F. initial to 135 0 F. final and relative
humidities 85 per cent initial to 40 per cent final) is recommended for drying Douglas fir.
7. That in some species there is apparently no relation between drying temperatures
up to 180 0 F. and the strength properties of the dry material. Such a conclusion, however,
needs further confirmation, and temperatures higher than those of Specification 20500-A have
not been recommended.
This work has been done under the necessity of getting results as quickly as possible and
with the primary object of checking the safety of the general kiln-drying specifications when
applied to the drying of airplane lumber on a commercial scale, together with the more or less
incidental object of ascertaining if conditions adapted to more rapid drying could be used.
Under these circumstances it has not been possible to investigate the subject in the fundamental
1

Now with some slight modification Spccfication 20500-A of the Bureau of Aircraft Production.

136990-20-2

9

10

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

way which it merits. Completion of the work already begun is contemplated and it is hoped
to be able later to carry out experiments to determine the effect of the various factors involved,
both separately and in combination, and to ascertain the maximum temperature and minimum
humidity that can be safely applied at any stage of the drying process. It is hoped also to carry
on comprehensive investigations of the closely relatcd subject of the bending of wood, for the
purpose of determining the steaming or other processes best adapted to successful bending
and to secure more accurate knowledge of the effect of such processes on the strength of the
wood.
NECESSITY FOR KILN DRYING.

Previous to the entrance of the United tates into the war aircraft engineers had not
encouraged the use of other than air-seasoned wo od, particularly for those parts requiring the
maximum strength. It had not been believed that it was po sible for material to be properly
prepared for such exacting service in any other way than by air seasoning over a period of
several months or even year, depending on the size of t he stock and on the climatic conditions
at the point where the seasoning took place. 'The use of kiln-dried material had been tabooed
because it had not been demonstrated that optimum results with respect to the strength proome of the prejudice against kiln drying was
peI-ties could be secured through kiln drying.
undoubtedly due to acquaintance or experience with material which had been improperly kiln
dried and hence greatly damaged.
Upon the adoption by our Government of an aircraft production program of great magnitude it was easy to be seen that the stock of air-dried material of the species then accepted for
aircraft construction wou ld be exhausted before even a fr action of the production planned for
the first year could be accomplished. Hence, th e kiln drying of material for airplanes became
imperative. 'The prime requisite was to find or develop metho d of kiln drying which would
assure material of maximum strength properties. The problem f cutting the period of drying
to the minimum was not so important, as it was the opinion that a period of from one to two
months for the drying of such species as pruce would answer, if necessary.
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS.

•

For some 12 years previous to this time the F rest ervic had been carrying on investigations of the best types of kiln construction and methods of kiln opera tion to produce dry
stock of maximum quality. These investigations had re ulted in the invention, patenting,
and dedication to public use of a new type of dry kiln in whieh excellent control of the important
factors of temperature, humidity, and circulation could e seeured. However, few of the
species of importan ce in airplane construction had b en included in these kiln-drying investigations. Also, the effort had been largely directed toward pr venting the great losse from
checking, casehardening, hollow-horning, and the like, which in many commercial drying
operations had been excessive; and consequently tes ts had not been made to determine
whether material having the maximum strength properties was being secured . However,
about the time the kiln-drying studies were first starLed a very carefully planned and executed
series of tests had been made to determine the effect, on strength, of exposure for various
periods of time to dry air and to steam, both a t various temperatures and pressures. These
experiments 1 were on loblolly pine, white ash, and red oak. Additional knowledge of the
effects of various temperatures had been gain d from the resul ts of te ts of material which
had been subjected to various steps involved in the application of preservative treatment.
Foreseeing the necessity for knowledge of the effect of kiln-drying operations on the strength
of airplane woods, the Forest Products Laboratory before the declaration of war arranged
trength tests made on material
to secure a quantity of partially air-dry spruce and white ash.
dried in three preliminary l,iln runs with a ra ge of temperatures and humidities, indicated
that spruce and ash could be successfully and safely kiln dried by u ing moderate temperatures and fairly high relative humidities, with careful control of kiln conditions. That material
might be seriously damaged in strength properties without displaying visible signs of deteri• A r~um6 or the results "'ns published in the L umber World Review, Apr. 10, 1918.

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

11

oration was also indicated. This denoted that perfection of appearance did not constitute
a safe criterion for the acceptance of material for exacting uses such as aircraft construction,
and emphasized the need for standardization of drying practice and the specifying of limiting
conditions to be used.
ADOPTION OF SPECIFICATIONS AND BEGINNING AND SCOPE OF PRESENT WORK.

With these tests and the previous experience of the laboratory in many lines as a basis,
Signal Corps Specification 20500 (now with some slight modification Bureau of Aircraft Production Specification 20500-A) was drawn up. The general problem of kiln drying airplane
stock, however, was by no means solved. Although the tests which had been made were
sufficiently extensive to form, in the existing emergency, a basis of kiln-drying specifications,
it was very desirable to get a further check upon their applicability through additional tests.
It was also desirable to determine if it would be possible to use conditions adapted to more
rapid drying. Moreover, there were a considerable number of species which were looked
upon as suitable substitutes for spruce, ash, and the other woods which experience had already
shown to be adapted to aircraft construction. It was regarded as essential that safe methods
of drying these species be developed. In addition to this, the laboratory was undertaking
tests of numerous features of airplane construction and it was necessary to have dry material
for use in these tests.
The work has now covered 26 1 species, with approximately 100 kiln runs and with some
100,000 mechanical tests to determine the effect of the processes. It is the purpose of this
monograph to set forth in detail the methods used, to give in considerable fullness the data
secured and conclusions drawn, and thus to make available information for the guidance of
those engaged. in aircraft construction and others who may be interested in kiln drying wood
in such a manner as to retain the maximum strength.
BASIS OF TESTS AND COMPARISONS.

Since kiln drying was to take the place of extended periods of air seasoning, it was but natural to adopt air drying as a basis by which to judge the effect of kiln drying. It might seem to
one not well acquainted with the phenomena revealed by tests of strength properties of wood
that it would be feasible to kiln dry a given lot of material, make tests upon it, and compare
directly with the strength of air-dry material of the same species, as determined by previous
tests. Such a method, it is true, might suffice to detect any severe damage or excessive deficiency in strength properties brought about by the drying processes. In the present experiments, however, the aim was to find kiln processes such that the resulting material would be
at least equal in strength properties to the same material had it been carefully air seasoned.
The decision as to whether this has been accomplished requires more exact comparisons than
can be obtained by the method given above. Also in such work it is desirable to be able to
distinguish small differences in the effect of two or more different treatments in order to discover the tendency of a change in the treatments.
The study of data derived from some 130,000 tests on 129 different species of native woods
tested at the Forest Products Laboratory previous to the beginning of this work has shown
something of the variability that may be expected. It has been found, for instance, that
even when as many as possible of the factors contributing to the variation of timber are under
control, the average of material from a tree selected at random would be expected to differ
from a true average of the species by from 7 to 15 per cent, depending upon which of several
important strength properties was considered. The variation of individual specimens is, of
course, much greater. Consequently, it is essential to make certain that the material subjected to any treatment whose effect is to be found is as inherently like that with which it is
to be compared as possible. In other words, no very close estimate of the effect of kiln drying
upon the strength is possible from comparisons of the properties of two lots of material, one
being kiln dried and the other air dried, and both selected at random.
• Data and information on but a part of tho species are available and included herein.

12

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CO M MITTEE F OR AERONAUTICS.

The problem presents two alternatives. One is to divid the green stock of a given tree
or trees into two lots, one of which is tested after kiln drying and the other after air drying.
This involves a delay in the analysis until the air drying i complete and the tests made, and was
deemed impracticable because of the demand for immediate information.
The second alternative is to make a compari on with the results previously obtained from
material of the same species and tested in both the gree n and the air-dry conditions. On the
basis of this comparison a conclusion may be drawn as to whether kiln drying has produced as
favorable a change in properties as had been found, from the previous tests, to result from air
drying. This second method is, of comse, the best adapted to securing quick results. On the
other hand, it does no t, for reasons which have been mentioned and which will be further discussed later, justify as definite and certain conclusions as the first.
The plan actually followed was a combination o[ the two alternatives.
The material for testing was brought to the laboratory in log form, and was there cut up
into three lots. The first was tested gr en, the second after kiln drying, and the third after
thorough air seasoning. Methods of mak ing this divi iOll are f r ther discussed under " Preparation of Material."
As soon as the test on kiln-dried material were available they were analyzed and preliminary
conclusions drawn from a compari on with p reviously air-dried material of the same specie .
This can be safely done only on the part of those who are experienced and familiar with strength
values and particularly familar with the varia tions that are likely to be met with in stock of a
given species grown in different localities. If th e kiln-dried material proves to be greatly superior or greatly inferior it is safe to sa y po itively that it would also have been superior or inferior to stock of the same tree air dried. If, however, the difference turn out to be small and
less than the probable variation of an average of the trength property, definite conclusions are
not possible. This analysis is, therefore, regarded a preliminary and final conclusion are withheld until air-dry material from the same tree and part of t rees ha been tested. The comparisons then possible are known to be free of orne of the fact ors enumerated below and the
rest can be adjusted for or can be redu ced in impor tance by working with a large number of
tests. Where this has been done the difference in strength properties between kiln-dried and
air-dried stock and between stock dried under different kiln conditions can be stated, with considerable assurance, to be due to differences in drying conditions only.
VARIADJ,ES AFFECTING RESULTS.

The factors which affect test results and contribute to their variability may be enumerated
as follows:
(1) Defects (knots, decay, shakes, etc.) .
(2) Density.
(3) Species.
(4) Moisture content and distribution .
(5) Rate of testing.
(6) Temperature at time oftest.
(7) Position in tree.
(8) Tree characteristics (varying with locality of growth, soil, elevation, etc.) .
(9) Unex'plained variations (usually foIl wing the laws of p robability).
These factors must be so handled that their effects will not be mistaken for the effect of the
kiln-drying process. The effects of these Iactors are eliminated from comparisons in the following
manner:
All pieces having visible defects which it is evident would lessen their strength are discarded at the outset. Inspection is also made after test, since some defects are likely not to be
revealed until the specimen has failed .
Regarding density and position in the tree, fairly general relations have been deduced from
the extensive investigations previously m ade. It is a general rule that the strength properties
of wood of any species vary directly as some power of the density ; that the density, and therefore
the strength, decreases with height from ground at growth (spruce seems to be an exception to

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

13

this); and that there is a considerable but unpredictable variation between strength and distance
from the pith of the tree. Provided the test specimens come from the same height in the tree
and the same region of annual growth, there does not seem to be much difference in strength
with regard to cardinal direction in the living tree.
It is evident, then, that the influence of density, position in tree, and tree characteristics
can be eliminated from comparisons, as far as the kiln-drying work is concerned, by selecting
material for test in the green, kiln-dried, and air-dried conditions, not only from the same tree
but also from its corresponding parts. The existence of tree characteristics also makes it desirable that several trees be represented in each kiln run. It is also found that unexplained
variations are such as to necessitate that each tree be represented in each group (green, air-dried,
and kiln-dried) by a considerable number of specimens.
The effect of moisture content and distribution could be eliminated by bringing the kiln and
air-dried material to the same moisture content before test. This, however, requires an
excessive amount of time and it is found more feasible to allow for comparatively small
differences in moisture content by making ad justments of the data. These adjustments will be
discussed later.
Differences in moisture content between parts of the same specimen are avoided by allowing
a period of air easoning after the kiln drying, thus bringing the moisture in the material to practically uniform distribution. Material which is air dried is not tested until it has reached a
practically constant weight and the moisture content has become approximately uniform.
The effects of rate of test and temperature at time of test are cared for by properly standardized testing methods.
MECHANICAL TESTS AND THE PROPERTIES DETERMINED FROM THEM.

The standard tests made on wood at the Forest Products Laboratory and the mechanical
properties determined from them are:
Static bending.
Fiber strees at elastic limit.
Modulus of rupture.
Modulus of elasticity.
Work to elastic limit.
Work to maximum load .
Total work.
Impact bending.
Fiber stress at elastic limit.
Modulus of elasticity.
Work in bending to elastic limit.
Height of drop to failure (50-pound hammer).
Compression parallel to grain.
Fiber stress at elastic limit.
Oru hing strength.
Modulus of elasticity.
Compression perpendicular to grain.
Fiber stress at elastic limit.
Shearing strength parallel to grain.
Radial.'
Tangential. I
Cleavage.
Radial.'
Tangential. I
Tension perpendicular to grain.
Radial.'
Tangential.'
Hardness.
End.
Radial.
Tangential.
J

The terms "radial" and " tan,.ntial" refer to the surface offailuro. Radial tension is tension perpendicular to the radial surface.

14

AN UAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

It may not appear necessary to perform all of these tests on the green, kiln-dried, and airdried material in order to get a sufficiently reliable basis for the determination of the effect of
kiln drying. On the other hand, it would not do to select one kind of test on one property
and assume that if the kiln dried stock proved to be superior or inferior to air-dried, all
the other propertie would also be Sup!3rior or inferior. The several properties may very
well, and do in fact, prove to be affected in different ways by the various conditions of seasoning.
This phenomenon is amply illustrated by data presented later.
PROPERTIES ON WHICH ANALYSIS IS BASED AND THEm SIGNIFICANCE.

The analysis of the effect of kiln-drying is, therefore, based on the tests which bring
out the properties deemed most important in airplane construction; namely, static and impact
bending and compression parallel to grain; although all of the tests are made because the tests
of lesser importance can be made at a comparatively low cost and serve at times as a check on
the conclusion reached from a study of the principal test data.
The properties chosen for principal attention in the analysis are five in number. They
are: Modulus of rupture, modulus of elasticity, and work to maximum load, obtained from
the static-bending test; height of drop, obtained from the impact-bending test; and maximum
crushing strength, obtained from the compression-parallel-to-grain test.
By modulus of rupture is meant the computed fiber stress in the outermost fibers of the
the beam at the maximum load. It is a measure of the ability of a beam to support a
slowly applied load for a very short time. I t is not a true fiber stress, since the formula
by which it is computed is exactly applicable only within the elastic limit. The term is, however, universally accepted and the values are quite comparable for various species and sizes
of lumber. It is, moreover, a definitely measurable quantity which does not depend to any
extent on any personal factor as does, for instance, fiber stress at elastic limit.
The modulus of elasticity is a measure of the stiffness or rigidity, of a material, and is of
value in computing the deflections of joists, beams, and stringers, and safe loads for columns.
Although it is derived from the static bending test it is directly applicable to columns as well
as beams.
Work to maximum load represents the ability of a wooden part to absorb shock with a
slight permanent or semi-permanent deformation with some injury to the wood, and is a measure
of the combined strength and toughness of a material under bending stresses. It is one of the
most important properties as far as airplane wood is concerned.
Height of drop is the vertical fall of a 50-pound hammer causing complete failure under
the impact-bending test, and represents a quality that is important in members which are
occasionally stressed beyond the elastic limit. It is a very variable quantity but ranks with
work to maximum load in importance as a measure of the suitability of a wood for airplane use.
The value of maximum crushing strength, as obtained from the compres ion-parallel-tograin test, lies in the possibility of estimating the strength of parts used as columns. It is a
very simple test and is frequently the only one used in studying the effect of a treatment or
process on wood. However, it does not necessarily follow that others are affected in the same
way and, particularly not with respect to the very important properties of work to maximum
load and height of drop. These latter are measures of toughness, or shock resistance, which
quality is not brought out by the compression-parallel-to-grain test. 1
The manner of conducting these and the minor tests and the significance of each of the
properties is discussed in various circulars and bulletins of the Forest Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture. 2
Boo p. 37 and footnote thereto.
, Soo particularly Forest Service Circular 38 (Revised) and Bulletin 556 of tho United States Department of Agriculture. Sco also "Working
Plan for Project 124," included as an appendb: in The Mechanical Properties of Wood, by S. J. Record, published by John Wiley & Sons.
1

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

15

PREPARATION OF MATERIAL.
SELECTING, CUTTING, AND MATCHING OF ST OCK.

The necessity for having material so selected that comparisons will be only between groups
which consist of material inherently alike has been pointed out. The method of cutting logs
and selecting material will be illu trated for each of several species. Great care has at all
times been taken to make certain that kiln-dried material is as inherently like the green and
air-dried to which it is compared as possible.
In most cases the material for test was selected in the woods or from log yards and sent
to the laboratory in log form. There it was stored on skids in the yard until required. In general, species which were in use or considered as sub titutes for spruce in wing beams, struts,
etc., were cut into 2; or 3 inch planks, in which sizes the material was kiln-dried. Species
looked upon as promising for propeller woods were sawed into I-inch lumber and kiln-dried
in this thickness.
Test specimens were 2 by 2 inches in cross section for those species dried in the 2t or 3
inch thickness. Bending specimens were 30 inches long and were tested with center load
on a span of 2 inches. Specimens from the species dried in I-inch thickness were i by 2 inches
in section. Bending specimens were 20 inches long and were tested with load I1t the center of
an 18-inch span.
Specimens for test while green were cut and planed to size at the time of cutting material
from the log. Specimens for test after air drying were at the same time cut roughly to size
and stored for drying. Specimens to represent the kiln-dried material were not cut until after
the kiln-drying was completed. Specimens which were to be air-dried were carefully piled
in a shed where they were well up off the ground, were sheltered from the sun and from precipitation, and were subjected to very free circulation of air. Ends of these specimens were
dipped in melted paraffin to retard drying from the end . The endeavor was to give them the
best possible environment for air-dryinO'.
Each shipment of a pecies i considered a unit. It has not been possible to get all shipments of a species uniform as to size and length of logs, etc. Logs of one species differ greatly,
of course, from those of another in size and character. The method of grouping material is
influenced by 11 number of factors, such as size of logs, number of kiln runs in which each log
is to be represented, method of sawing (plain or quarter- awed), thickness of material to be
dried, and number of logs in shipment. C nsequcntly it was impo sible to adopt a single
standard plan for cutting, marking, and grouping; each shipment had to be studied separately and the method best suited to it adopted.
Figure 1 (A) to (E) illustrates everal of the methods of cutting log. Figure 1 (E) shows
how the logs of Sitka spruce of shipment 504 were divided. These logs were so large that
it was necessary to split them before they could be sl1wed. They were first split into quarters.
Each quarter was then split circunlferentially into two pieces and thc outer one of these pieces
was again split radially into two pieces. The re ulting 12 pieces were sawed a shown. The
central flitches HL and MK were cut into sticks 21 by 2l inches in the rough. Matched specimens for test in the green and air-dry conditions were provided in accordl1nce with the following
scheme : With an 8-foot log or double-length bolt a a unit, two flitches extending through
thc tree in one direction, as in figure 1 (B), or in each of two direction, as in figure 1 (E), are
cut into 21 by 2-t inch sticks. Tho e are numbered as in figures 1 (B) and (E), the number
consisting of a letter and a figure, as H3, L6, etc. Those sticks are then grouped for test as
follows:
STICK NUMBERS .

Lower bolt ... _.. _... 1
4, 5
, 9}T t d
2, 3
6, 7 etc. es e green.
Upper bolt..........
Lower bolt ......... . 2, 3
6,7
4, 5
pper bolt .... . ..... 1

S, 9}Tested after air-drying.

16

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

SHIPMENT L 526

AFR jCAN MAHOGANY

I - B OL TS A, B, C,&O
{3UTT-.3<J1$ " O//lMCrCR
TOP 34~·O/AMt-rfP.

p-

/-

v

TRCE -3
332 RINGS

I

BOLTS M - N
O//1M. 3.3"

M

..

*" .. , ,

SHIPME NT L-523

DOUGLAS FIR

T!'IfT

.'
,

?

", ..

3D

n. ;!;

*~~

-- ::;;!~
~t:: ~~~ - H
"'~ ~~
::0
~

37

!"

HI"

\

v Z

;~,

1C'Jk--i% tOC\j ~I~ ""'"''
NC\:f\.I

~,,

~

"",,,,

:. {4-

15

I'

.,

V

22
21

v

v Dried In xiln run 100
x rurn ished specimens fOr fest in
gre-en a, airdry conditions
f/f Dried in Kiln Run 109
COMMERCIAL WHITE ASH-5HIP.
TRet: I

All shaded porlions represenT
wasre marerial.
• Dried in kiln run 99
"Dried in kiln run 101
"'Kiln dried bur nol resrec1

L-'O~

Lt::NGTH 16'
-L • -I -M
1f.R.IOI

i

3

i
S

I

Impacr reST

S Sfatic

)( rurnished .specImens fOr re.sr
alrdry condtfions
v' Kiln dried

In

leST

9reen and

SITKA SPRUCE
TRet: I

SHIPMENT L 504
80L TS Cd 0

LeNGTH 91'

v Kiln Run 91

OIA. 56 "

®

Kiln Run 93
+ Kiln Run 94
Morerial fOr green and
L
air-dry feMoS Trom cenTer rlifch es
#

FlO. I.-Method 01 outting logs into lumber lor kiln drying and into test specimens.

ll:FFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

17

That is, two composite bolts are formed , each including half the sticks from the upper
bolt and half those from the lower bolt. The sticks of one of these composite bolts are tested
green and those from the other after air-drying.
Figure 1 (D) shows how planks are divided into sticks for static and impact-bending tests
after having been dried in the kilns. In general, half of the sticks of any given group-green, airdried, or from any kiln run-are tested in static bending and half in impact. One specimen
from each stick is tested in compression parallel to grain. One-half of the static-bending
sticks furnish smaller specimens for compression-perpendicular-to-grain tests; the other half
give specimens for hardness tests. Shear, cleavage, and tension-perpendicular-to-grain specimens are taken from impact-bending sticks.
Figure 1 (A) and (0) are cutting diagrams as used for African mahogany and white ash,
and are typical of diagrams for logs which were cut into I-inch material or were not sufficiently
large to be cut as in figure 1 (B) or (E).
INSPECTION OF STOCK.

Immediately previous to being placed in the kiln all material is very carefully inspected
and any defects and imperfections noted and marked on the piece or made a matter of record.
On removal from the kiln it is again inspected and record made of any increase in the previously
noted defects, such as extension of shakes, increase of checks, or loosening of knots; also of
warping and cupping, the development of new checks, etc. It is also examined for casehardening.
KILN DRYING AND TESTING.

Following the initial inspection the material is placed in experimental kilns and dried. On
removal from the kilns it is stored for a brief period, after which the standard tests as previously
enumerated are made.
METHODS OF ANALYSIS.

We come now to a discussion of the actual comparison of the test data on material dried
under different kiln conditions and in the air. Because of the several influencing factors which
have been enumerated, this comparison can not be made directly from a table of properties in
which these properties are grouped according to the seasoning conditions. The reason is that
in the case of the preliminary analysis the air-dried stock used for comparison was not inherently
like that kiln-ell'ied. The trees and the parts of the trees are necessarily different and the
localities of growth are, in general, different also. In the final analysis the tests of the several
kiln runs and the air-ell'ied were on matched stock; that is, on stock inherently the same. Thus
the source of possible error in making a direct comparison introduced by unlike stock falls away.
However, differences in moisture content still usually exist at the time of test.
IMPROVEMENT RATIOS.

In attempting to find for use in the preliminary analysis some basis of comparison which
would, as far as possible, avoid the errors resulting from inherently different material in the
groups compared, study of the available data showed that the change in properties which is
produced by drying is in general somewhat less variable than the strength values. Accordingly,
it was believed that the effect of kiln drying could be better judged by comparing the change
which it produced with the corresponding change produced by air drying than by comparing
strength values of the kiln-dried and air-dried material. The mathematical measure of this
change is defined as an It improvement ratio."
t'
Improvement ra

10 =

Strength value for kiln or air dried material
Same strength value for matched green material

Early tests of the effect of moisture on the strength properties had shown that in one
species, at least, the effect of moisture change was practically independent of the specific gravity
of the wood. On the other hand, the strength properties are very largely influenced by the
specific gravity. Although the relation of specific gravity to strength has been the subject
of considerable study and important principles have been deduced, it is not pos ible to make
adjustment of strength figures for differences in specific gravity with sufficient exactness for
136990-20--3

18

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

the present purpose. Hence, it seems that comparisons are likely to be less affected by differences in specific gravity if based on improvement ratios than if based on the strength properties
themselves.
ADJUSTMENT FOR DIFFERENCES OF MOISTURE CONTENT.

In some instances the strength properties of wood change very rapidly with changes in
moisture. Some strength properties of some species are nearly tripled in drying from the green
condition to about 8 per cent moisture. In other instances, however, the strength properties
are decreased in drying. After wood has passed the fiber-saturation point,! a change of 1 per
cent in the moisture content may produce as much as 7 or 8 per cent change in the strength
value. Consequently, since it is impracticable to bring the various groups of material which
are to be compared to the same moisture content before test, it is essential to the accuracy of
comparisons that careful attention be given to adjustment of strength values for differences of
moisture content.
Several years ago a rather comprehensive study of the relation of moisture content to the
strength of wood was carried out by the Forest Service at laboratories then maintained at
Yale niversity.2 This investigation, however, covered comparatively few species, and not all
the strength properties of these. In taking up the analysis of the data on the effect of kiln
drying on strength, the need of a general moisture-strength law which would be applicable to
all species and all properties became apparent. For the purpose of developing such a law the
existing data were very carefully reviewed.
Figure 2, taken from Forest Service Bulletin 70, illustrates the relation between moisture
and several strength properties of red spruce. The graph for modulus of rupture is seen to be a
curve from zero to about 30.5 per cent moisture, beyond which it is a straight horizontal line.
This shows that as moisture increases strength decreases until a point is reached where there is
no further decrease. This point (30.5 per cent in this case) is termed the fiber-saturation point.
At this point the cell walls are completely saturated, but there is no free or excess water in the
pores of the cells.
In studying data as given in Forest Service Circular 108 and Forest Service Bulletin 70 on
the several species and properties, it was found that when the logarithm of the strength property
was plotted against the percentage moisture the points could be averaged, with but comparatively little error, by a straight line. rrills was so consistently true that the application of the
principle involved to other species and to other propertie was thought to be justified. The
relation as found may be stated mathematically as follows:
s= Ox lOAM
where S is the strength value at any moisture content, M, below the fiber-saturation point, and
o and .A are empirical factors. It has been assumed that the type of curve represented by the
above equ ation is applicable to all properties, to all species, and to all drying conditions. Tho
differences between these various curves are represented by the constants (0 and A) which
adapt the type equation to specific instances. These constants for any specific case are derived
from the data to which the equation is to be applied. The following equation, derived from
that given above, is conveniently applicable to improvement ratios:
Ms-M2
L og R 2= M.-Ml X L og R 1

where M. = moisture content at fiber-saturation point.
Ml = moisture content of air-dried or kiln-dried material at time of test.
M2 = moisture content to which it is desired to adjust improvement ratios.
Rl = improvement ratio of dry material at moisture content of Ml'
R2 = improvement ratio adjusted to moisture content M 2 •
The factor Ohas been eliminated in the derivation of this equation.

The fraction

~:~~l is the

value of A . In other words, the value of A for use in the adjustment of a set of data is derived
from the data.
I

See second paragraph following.

• Results and discussion of these tests are given in Forest Service Circular lOS and Forest Service Bulletin 70.

19

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGT H OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

16000
15000

[\

\

1
4000

~

13000

\
\ r..

12000

SPRU CE

~

~'Cn

!\

I~

~,
~

"\ ~

I,

' -:Al

~

(~
~~
\::)

,..>

~
en

'\

~

\.

"\

V\

- ~~~

"\ ~~

50 0 0

I-

~S"

-:c

N ~'"
~

~0 ~..z..

4000

'" '"

~-- ~<"
~ ~~
...-y,
j>-.

~.>.~

3000

'"~

2000
I-

1000

00

Sh tcAh'// v/:"

~

ca IWp/'Tc

5

10

20

..............

~

----........... ...
r-

~s/o/ 1/ .3%

15

~ to..

-.e NG 7-1

L>EFcf?MA

25

30

/'o /v

35

40

45

50

MOISTURE-PER CENT OF DRY WEIGHT
FIG. 2.-Relation between strength values and moisture content for red spruce in various kinds OHesti. The lowest curve is for compression al
right angles to grain .

}

20

ANNUAL REPORT NA.'l'IONAL ADVISORY COMMI'l'TEE FOIt AERONA.UTICS.

The use of this formula is illustrated by the following example:
The average modulus of rupture of a certain group of material tested at 9.0 per cent moisture
was 10,240 pounds per square inch. The modulus of rupture of the corresponding green material was 4,890 pounds per square inch. The fiber-saturation point is 23 per cent. What
would be the improvement ratio adjusted to 11 per cent moisture ~
M.=23
M2=11
Ml =9.0
10240
Rl = 4890 =2.095
23-11

Log R2=23_9.0X log 2.095
12

= 14 X .321 = .275

and

R 2 = 1.88
Also, modulus of rupture at 11 per cent=4,890 X1.88= 9,400 pounds per square inch.
As stated above, improvement ratios and methods of adjusting them for moisture are made
use of in preliminary analyses where it is necessary to compare kiln-dried material with airdried ml1terial from a different source. They are I1lso found very convenient in comparing
kiln-dried material with the air-dried materil1l actun.lly matching it. These latter groups are
seldom at the same moisture content whon tested; consequently adjustment for moisture is
necessary. This adjustment is made a trifle more easily on improvement ratios than on the
strength properties themselves.
DISCUSSION BY SPECIES.I

The various species on which tests have been made will now be discussed individually.
This discussion will be divided into two parts, corresponding to two groups as follows:
Group 1.-Species on which data are available from tests on matched groups of green,
air-dried, and kiln-dried material.
GroulJ 2.-8pecies on which data are not yet available on air-dried material matching that
tested green and after kiln drying.
Group 1 consists of Sitka spruce, Douglas fir, western white pine, and white ash.
Group 2 includes white pine, Norway pine, western hemlock, white fir, Port Orford
cedar, bald cypress, Central American mahogany, African mahogany (khaya sp.), northern
and southern white oak, southern red oak, black walnut, sugar maple, and yellow birch.
The kiln-dried material of the first three species of group 1 will be compared directly to
air-dried material matching it. Western white pine will be used as an example of the two methods of analysis. It will first be discussed and analyzed as if tests on the air-dried material
matching that which was tested after kiln drying were not available. It will then be discussed on the basis of comparison of kiln-dried material with air-dried which is matched to it.
This plan will afford a comparison of the two methods of analysis.
Since group 2 consists of those species in which data from tests of air-dried material matched
to that kiln dried are not yet available, conclusions must necessarily be made by the method
first illustrated under the discussion of we tern white pine. Data on the various species of
this group are not included. Only conclusions reached and recommendations based thereon
are gIven.
1 The species names used herein are those official in the United States Forest Service except the following: Central American mahogany
(Swietenia mahagoni), which is offiC
ially termed "mahogany;" African mahogany (Khaga sp.), for which no official name has been adopted by

the Forest Service; and "commercial white ash," concerning which see rootnote, p. 53.
The official Co=on and botanical names for the other species are: Sitka spruce (Picea Bitchensis), Douglas fir (P8tudo~a taxi/olia), west·
ern white pine ( Pinus manticola), Port Orrord cedar ( Chammcypuriil laW8oniana), bald cypress ( Taxodium di8ticht£m), western hemlock ( T8t£(/a
heterophylla), white pine (Pinu8 8tTobus), Norway pine (P inus resi710811 ), white fir (Abies concolor), black walnut (Jt£gla1l8 nigra), sugar maple (Acer
saccharum), yellow birch (B etula luteal. Other common and botanical names applied to the various species are given in Forest Service Bulletin
17, "Check List olthe Forest 'I'rees of the United States."

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRE "GTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

21

It is not the function of this monograph to discuss kiln-drying schedules; consequently only
such data concerning the drying in these experimental runs as is essential to an understanding
and interpretation of the results of the strength tests are included. Neither is it intended that
the various graphs of kiln conditions should furnish comparisons of the various processes with
respect to rate of drying. For such discussions and comparisons the reader is referred to a
monograph by H. D. Tiemann entitled "The Kiln Drying of Wood for Airplanes" and published as one of this series. It is also desired to emphasize the fact that the runs described
herein were experimental and are not presented as models, nor necessarily as recommended
practice.
SITKA SPRUCE.

Becautle of the importance of Sitka spruce as an airplane material, more experimental
kiln drying has been done on this species than on any other. The results of 13 kiln runs made
with different combinations of temperature, humidity, circulation, and other factors which may
affect strength properties are available for analysis. The first three runs are those which have
been previously mentioned as preliminary. These runs were made on partially air-dried
rough plank. Because of the fact that the material tested was quite limited in amount, and
the further fact that the other runs have furnished much more comprehensive data, it is unnecflessary to present the data on these preliminary runs.
SOURCE OF MATERIAL.

The other 10 runs, on which full data are available, were made on material sent to the
laboratory in the log form, in three different shipments.
Shipment 504 consisted of SL,{ 8-foot logs from four trees grown in Clatsop County, Oreg.
They ranged in diameter from 53 to 77 inches. Trees 1 and 2 were each represented by two
8-foot logs, namely, bolts c-d \ and i-j for tree I, bolts a-b and i-j for tree 2. Trees 3 and 4
were represented by the e-f bolts only. Material from trees 2 and 3 was used in kiln runS
88 and 89, while trees 1 and 4 supplied stock for runs 91,93, and 94.
Shipment 563 came from Portland, Oreg. Much of the material was used for special
drying teo ts which it is not the purpose to consider here. The hipment furnished material for
runs 147 and 14 .' data and discussion of which are included in thi publication.
Shipment 578 consi ted of six logs, from as many trees, and varying in diameter from 60 to
66 inches. Trees I, 4, 5, find 6 were represented by the a-b bolts, tree 2 by the c-d bolt, and
tree 3 by the e-f bolts. Trees 2 and 3 furni hed material for kiln run 163, while material from
the other trees was equally divided between runs 171 and 172.
Previously tested green and air-dried material, with which compari on i made, Wfi . secured
from one tree from ·Chehali COUll ty, Wah.
CUTTING AND MARKING.

The cutting and marking of Sitka spruce has been previously described (see pp. 15 and
17) is illustrated in figure 1 (E).
DESCRIPTION OF KILN-DRYING CONDITIONS.

Figure 3 hows graphically the kiln condition and moisture content of am pIes of the
imilar data for run 147, 14 , 163 171, and 172 are
stock for runs 88, 89, 91, 93, and 94.
shown in figure 4.
Kiln rU118 88 and 9.- Kiln run
and 9 were made on stock in the form of plank ' 3 inches
thick and of various width. The plank were piled flat find open fi n indicated in figure 5.
This figure hows the piling, arrangement of heating coils condcn er coil, pray line, and regulating and measuring instruments for kiln run 9, but tho e for kiln run 8 were not e sentially
different. Both of the e runs were made in a water- pray kiln. Two-inch stickers were u ed,
and openings of an inch left between the plank of each tier. Kiln run 89 had much the milder
\ This lettering o( bolts is in accordance wiU, the (allowing schome: Beginning at tbe stump, each ~ (eet o( length o( the tree is assigned 8 letter.
The 4-(oot bolt above the stump is thon a, the second b, etc. The lirst and second taken together are called a-b, the eighth and ninth together
h-i, etc.

22

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

KILN RUN 88

KILN RUN 89

r-

I(
~/60

/60

I<j

1t!4()

J

\!)

~/20

tf

I

100

L
\I

\.)4-0
Q:

~

"-

II V

80

;

II

1o.

v

~" C
8

t

01

6

024-

IT ,

n/ n

m

m m

I,

~/60
'<J

U

Q

5

r-

f

's

~n

0

t-

a m

6

024

Q

'r-

KILN RUN 93

180

I'-

l-

W

o~t

r

zo
o

#

m

M

DAYS

KILN RUN 91

",180

iv' i if
1-

e

Q •
DAYS

r

60

L
"

20

o

" f r

r-

~

100

;

t.J

trr

120

.'

~

80

...
~60

IW

160

160

f<14-0

IW

140

~/20

120

KILN RUN 94 H -

t-

180

I'r. mPfjr, .Jr.

\!)

100

i!-

~

~40

,.....

Q:

.t-

A 19 "

~ 20

oh

r--.

2

6
8
DAYS

4-

10

12

~

~
q::

40

"

,

-

H

6

t

f

8

o

t

10 1 142

o

2

6

4-

.

Tt

~

r-. '

"

,v I i

S rr I

8

10 12 14

I

40

BIG

o

:s

<'

o

2

4

6

8

U

(J

n

10 12 14 /6 /8 20

DAys
r-

KiLN R UN 172

1 0
4

80

90
,. i

t

H m <It

60

§40

40
A .

20

o

2

4

6

8

B

•

is u e

fo

I

1 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 C6
0
nAYS

20

a
o

r

0

n

t

2

4

(;

6

.

I ··

8

f

I •

(;

20

100

f·

12

f r

1
20

I... 60

IS

120

16 0

~/20
<:::i100

o

140

KILN RVN 171

~/40

Il.:

6
8 10
DAYS

4-

Pm

is u"C
o 6

hf,

1
60

DAYS

<I)

~

if r

en

DAYS

"- 160

2

" e

KIL N RUN 163

60

i

a e

A

20
n

o

80

60

20
it

o

~

19

t-

100

40

024

m m

80

,

ni i

o

H

A

20

100

i

."

f r

KILN RUN 1
48

/20

..... 60

D

14-0

r -!l

100

8

f)

40

0

1
80

160

80

~

6

024

180

~ 1
20

~

e

I

65 kla,.s

DAYS
FIG. 3.-Kiln condit ions (or Sitka spruce, kiln runs 88, 89, 91, 93, 94 (shipment 504) .

l( 160
/40

ol/' r

o
14-

li

60

t-

KILN RVN 147

180

A e"

W,

80

,

o! 45
lt-

o

100

ir-y

II

60

110 S

t-

191

f

120

80

I\. {-i-

1-.60

~

"

I"

100

Hr" .

80

o

I

1I

1 12 14- /6 18
0

DAYS '
FIG. 4.-Kiln conditions lor Sitka s pruce, kiln rUDS 147 and 148 (shipment 563), and runs 163,171, and 172 (shipment 578).

1
4

EFFECT OF KILN DRYI G ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS •

23

. drying conditions of the two run , as the temperatures were lower by about 30° F. all through the
run and the humidities were higher. (See fig . 3.) In order to get uniform temperatures quickly
throughout the planks, runs 88 and 89 were begun with an initial steaming of four or five hours
at temperatures of 130° and 150°F., respectively. The very frequent rise in temperature in kiln
run 88 (see fig. 3) were due to faulty control apparatus. The stock from both runs appeared
to be in excellent condition at the close of the drying, and there was no degrade due to checking,
warping, or ca ehardening. Casehardening had developed during the latter part of the drying

FlO. 6.-8ootion of kiln and piling diagram, Sitka spruce, kiln run 194.

in both the run . In run 8 it wa relieved by teaming for two hours at 170° F., while in run
9 two steamings at 1 5° F. were required to do away with the stresses, one of two hours and
one of one hour duration.1
Kiln run 91 and 93.-Kiln run ' 01 and 93 were made in the same kiln as run 89, so that
figure 5, which illu trates the piling and the arrangement of kiln parts for run 9, will suffice for
these runs. The stock wa of 3-inch thickne ,and 11-inch sticker" were used. The kiln loads
were small, a only 600 board feet were dried in each.
'll. D. Tiemann's monograph, Tho Kiln Drying of Wood for Airplanes,

include~

a

di~cussion

of the stresses which Ilre formed during drying.

24

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

The material in run 91 was steamed twice to relieve casehardening. These steamings were
made at 180° F . for two and one-ha.lf hours and for one hour.
No casehardening was found at any time in the material dried in run 93, and therefore
steaming was unnece sary.
Kiln run 94.-The kiln arrangement and method of piling used in kiln run 94 are shown in
figure 6. In this run the stock was dried, not in the form of 3-inch planks, but in sizes suitable
for airplane beam planks. The load consi ted of 3 by 4, 2 by 3, 2 by 4, and 2 by 5 inch pieces,
all 8 feet in length. The 3 by 4 inch pieces
were piled as hown in the diagram, using
1 i -inch stickers and leaving about 3 inches
between the sticks of each tier. The 2-inch
material was similarly arranged in a separate
pile behind that shown in the figure, the kiln
being twice as long as the sticks to be dried.
The same size stickers and spaces were u ed.
The run was mild and practically a repetition
of the temperatures and humidities of run 93
(see fig. 3). The final moisture content was
9.6 per cent, and there wa no visible degrade
nor any casehardening at any time during the
run.
Kiln run 147.-Run 147 was also made
on pieces of small size. The e were roughsawed sticks 2! inches square and 4 feet long.
The ends were dipped in an asphalt paint to
prevent drying from the ends. The piling was
open and on a slant, as shown in figure 7.
The material developed slight casehardening,
which was relieved by steaming twice at a
temperature of 160°, as hown on the temperature and humidity curves of figure 4.
Kiln run 148.- The other kiln run on
stock of shipment 563 was numbered 148.
This was made for the explicit purpose of
finding the effect, on both appearance and
strength, of high temperature drying with
moderate humidities. The load was a large
one for the ize of kiln, consisting of 2,400
board feet of 3-inch plank, which were flatpiled with no spaces between the planks. The
kiln was of the type shown in figure 6. The
kiln conditions and average moi ture contents
of the samples are shown in figure 4.
Kiln runs 163, 171, and 172.-0£ the
FIG. 7.-Sootion of kiln showing method of piling Sitka spruce, kiln
three kiln runs on stock from shipment 578
run 147.
the two runs numbered 163 and 172 were
practically the same with respect to piling and the temperatures used. Both runs were made
in water-spray kilns. The arrangements of the kilns and the locations of the measuring and
controlling instruments were practically the same as is shown in figure 6. The stock was in the
form of 2!-inch planks, 8 feet long, and valied in width from 6 to 18 inchcs. The piling was
flat, with It-inch stickers and with 2-inch spaces between the planks of each tier.
The stock of run 163 was given a preliminary steaming of two hours at 155° F. in order to
warm the planks through before drying conditions were established. The temperatures, humidities, and the average moistures for the six samples varied from day to day according to the

25

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

curves of figure 4. There was a 2 per cent degrade in this run, due to warping and to surface
checking in the sapwood of some of the planks.
Run 171 was a constant-temperature run, the temperature being 150 0 F. except during
the last three days, when it was 156 0 F.
THE Am DRYING.

Material of shipment 504, matching that kiln dried in runs 88, 89, 91, 93, and 94, was air
dried in the form of sticks 2~ by 2~ inches by 4 feet, the ends being carefully paraffined to prevent end drying. It was dried for about one year, from midsummer 1917 to midsummer 1918
in a shed without artificial heat. The shed was open on the north and closed On the other three
sides. The specimens were piled about 7 feet above the ground, midway between the ground
and the roof of the shed. The conditions thus secured were considered as favorable for perfect
air drying as are obtainable. When stored for drying the average moisture content of the group
of sticks matching two of the kiln runs (88 and 89) was about 49.1 per cent, and for another
group of sticks matching kiln runs 91, 93, and 94 about 41.5 per cent. The final moisture contents, after the material appeared to have reached constant weight, as indicated by periodic
weighing of samples, were found to be very uniform and somewhat higher than was anticipated. l
For six samples they were 14.0,14.3,14.2,14.3,14.3, and 14.5 per cent, giving an average of 14.3
per cent. The moisture at the time of test was nearly 2 per cent less, since some time necessarily
elapsed from the time of removal from the drying shed, during which time the sticks were stored
indoors in a warmer and drier atmosphere.
STRENGTH DATA.

The conclusions which are to be drawn regarding the effect, on the strength of Sitka spruce,
of the various conditions of seasoning just described are based on the study of a series of tables
givrng both the mechanical properties of the various groups of matelial and the improvement
ratios. The ratios are further presented in graph form for the sake of ready intercomparison.
TABLE

1.- Mechanical properties oj Sitka spruce.

2'abulation oj test data. No adjustment jor moisture.

Tree 186.
Shipment 325.
From Chehalis
County, Wash.
Properties.

Shipment 504. From Clatsop County, Oreg.

Green Air-{!ry
match- match- Kiln
ing
ing
Green. Alr-{!ry. kiln
run
kiln
88.
runs
runs
88,89.

Kiln

run
89.

88,89.

-- ---- - - - -

Green Air-{!ry
match- matching
Kiln
run
kiln
runs
91.
runs
9J~~, 91~r'

i3fn

Kiln

run
93.

Kiln

run
~.

- - - - - -- -- -

STATIC BENDING.

(per cent) ' .•. _..•. _.......•.•.• . .........
gravity· .. ..... •..• ... • · •. · ...• : •.•.•..••.•
Iber stress at elastic limit (Ibs. ~er sq. m.): .....•.
Fiber stress at maximum load (I s. per sq. m.) . ....
Modulus of elasticity 11 ,000 Ibs. per sq. in.~ .. __ .....
Work to elast!climit incJ:t·lbs. ~er cu. in. : ........
Work to maxunum load (mch-! s. per cu. m.) .. ...
Work, total (inch.lbs. per cu. in.) ... . . ..... ... ... ..

~olsture
~ecific

{9. 1

64. 4
.329
2,730
5,200
1,050
.43
5. 7
17. 9

8.8
.353
6,520
10,500
1,410
9.2
19. 9

3,060
5, 0{0
1,163
.47
5. 4
17. 1

73.2
.33
7,220
1,366
2.2
24.0

9. 0
.37
12,680
1,845
4.8
29.0

46.1
.353
8,020
1,307
2. 8
21.0

M .{

8.9
.35
8.9
16
4,980
5,070

49. 0
.343
14.8
24
1,860
2, 200

I.U

.m

12.4
9.1
.380
.377
6,870
5,910
8, 470 10,440
1,551
1,352
1.71
1.56
8.3
7. «
14.6
. .......

10.7
.369
6,090
9,110
l,il8

... .....

10. 7
. 362
5, 820
9,220
1, 373
1.{3
9.5
15.4

11.1
. 366
6, 160
8, 890
1, 478
1. 48
6. 7
.. . . . . ...

« .1
. 339
7,600
1, 2«
2.7
19

12. 2
.373
9,940
1,663
3.'
19.5

10.8
.360
10,380
1,696
3. 6
23

10.6
.365
10, 710
1,731
3.7
21

41 . 6
.337
13.9

12. 9
.363
7.4
35

10.{
.362
18.'

11.1

B. 2

. 363
13.8
66

.373
14. 9
M

U .S

7.7
13.4

. 338
3, 240
4, 820
1, 065
.57
5. 4
13.1

9.1
.375
11,500
1,702
4. 4
24

11. 7
. 366
10,900
1,650
' .1
22

12.5
9.2
. 378
.374
6.9
16. 6
34 . . . .....
--{680' 5, 010
5,530

10.5
.371

1.50

12. 5
.367
5,780

,.ao

1 , 3~

1.33
7.34

9.4
.368
7,320
10, 200
1, 517
2.01
7.6

...... ..

IMPACT BENDING,6G-POUND HAMMER.

Moisture (per cent)· .....••.•....•.••............ •..
•........•........ . •.... : ......•...•
.ber stress at elastic limit ~!bs. per sq. m.) •.•..•..
Modulus of elasticity ~1 ,000 bs. per sq ..in) ... . .....
Work to elasticJimit inch-Ibs. Eer cu. m.} ..•......
Inches drop 5Q.pound hammer 0 failure ....... . ....
~ifiCgravity

13.0
.377
10,120
1,618
3.5
22.4

9. 2
.374
12, 140
1,930
4. 3
25

COMPRESSION PARALLEL TO GRAIN.

Moisture (per cent)· •. .• •• ..••.•. •. .•.•. . ..•• -- •..••
Specific gravity' ••....•..••.•.•..•..•...•.•. _. . .•..
Rinj!'s per inch .. ... .......• . •... .. ................•
Summerwood (~ercent) . ... ....•... ..•. : ...• -••....
Fiber stress at e astic limit (Ibs. ~er sq. In.) .•.• •. .•
Fiber stress at maximum load (I s. per sq. in.) .....

.32
6.1
20
1,680
2,280

I7.{

--.;530' --i;900' --.;530' --.;600' "5;400·
2,100
5,100
5,120

• Very probably material which is air dried even In such small sizes does not reach its absolute minimum of moisture for several years.
, Per cent moisture based on oven·dry weight .
• Specific gravity based on oven·dry weight and volume as teated.

136990-20-----4

6,{00

26

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

T ABLE

I.-Mechanical properties of Sitka spruce.

Tabulation of test data.

No adjustment for moisture-Continued.

Shipment 563. From Mult·
nomah County, Oreg.
Green
match·
ing
kiln

Properties.

nlO

147.

Fioor stress at manmum load (1 s. per sq. Ul.) ... ...•.. .••
Modulus oC
elasticity ~l , OOO Ibs. per sq. in'l" .. . ... ..•... . .
Work to elastic limit ineh·lbs. ~er cu. in ......... .. . . .. . .
Work to maximum load (ineh.l s. per cu. in.) ...... .. .. ..
Work, total (in ch·lbs. per cu. in.) . ....... .... . ........ . . . .

Kiln
run
148.

148.

Green
match·
ing

kiln
r un
163.

Kiln
run
163.

Green
match·
inl{
kiln
run
171.

Green
match·
ing
kiln

Kiln
rnn
171.

rtlO

Kiln·
run
172.

172.

--- - - - - - - - - - --- - - - - - - - - - - - -

STATIC BENDING.

,(0. 5
3,279
5,967
I,H.

10.3
. 425
7, 582
10, 756
1, 503

6. 30

10.01

(0.3
.397

10.7
. 432

Moisture (per cent) I •..••.... •.... ..• •. •• ••.•• •. , ..••.• •••.

~g~~fis~re:sv~~~tastici iiilllt' c ~;ir sq: in".\;:::::::::::::::
ilis:

Oreen
match·
ing
kiln
run

Kiln
run
H7.

Shipment 578.

.400

37.9
. 397
3,750
6,0S.
1,474
.62
6.28

U.5
.(6.2
12.6
H.R
9.9
.~
. 338
.364
.362
.382
7,333
5,160
3, 4010
3,210
6,910
10, 942
5, ~~ 8,720 5,160 10,580
1,685
1,248
1,083
1,0
I,H8
1. 91
1.66
.52
1.87
.66
9.09
8.75
8.66
5. 70
6.86
-_. 0'''_. ........ ------ .. .. . . ..... . _-..... .........

,(0.0
.368
3,ISO
5, 120
1,061
.55
6.41

10.6
.381
7,220
10,520
1,,(03
2. 10
9.13
12.50

~. 8

9.8
. 385
9,780
1,858
3.3
24. 2

IMPACT BENDING, 5O·P OUND HAMMER.

Moisture (per cent)I . •.. . .•• . ...... • •• ••• .... •• ... • ••...• • .
gravity' .. . ...... •........... .. ....... . • . ..•.. .. . .
loor stress at elastic limit (lbs. per sq. in.) .............. . .
Modulus oC
elasticity ~ I , OOO lbs per sq. in.) ... .•. ...........
Work to elastic limit ineh·lbs. per cu. in.) .....•. .. . .. .. . .
Inches drop 5Q..poun d hammer to Cailure ......•.. . ....•.•. .
~ific

37.1
. 396
9,654

23.7

'''32:0'

1,556
3.4
24. 7

U. 8
.~

l1,m

1,894
• .2
25.4

H.I
. 346
7, 300
1, 278
2. •
27.5

10.7
.375
1l,420
1,724
4.2
26.6

.370
7,870
1,181
2.9
26. 7

10.7
.378
U,880
1, 623
4.9
24.3

43.8
. 34.5
8 . .(

12.2
. 370
7.2
32

40.1
.357
6.2
35

9.6
.378
6.6
38

~.O

.372
7,840
1,168
3.0
28.3

COMPRESSION PARA.LLE L TO GRAIN.

MoIsture (per cent)' •..... . ... ..... .... ......... . ... . .. .. . .

F~i;!:~~r~;·~~·t~·:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
Jo' iber stress at eYast!c limit (lbs. ~cr sq. in.); ...............

Fiber str ess at maXlmum load (I

40.9
. ,(01

11.3
. 427

3 .2
. 393
13.4
H

s. per sq. 10.) ............ "2;875' "5;973' " 2;8iO'

, Per cen t moisture based on oven·dry weight.

12.3
.427
9. 04
38
. . ... . ..
6,234

~

"2;300' "4;240' "2;4io' "1;;000'

,(0.8
10.7
.3S.
.356
6.8
8
38
34
.. . .. ... ........
2, 3SO
5,920

• Specific gravity based on oven-dry weight and volume as tested.

The mechanical properties of all the groups of material for all conditions of seasoning are
given in the single Table 1. An additional special table of data for comparing runs 147 and
148 is Table 9. These properties are average values of the average for all tests from each
double bolt, or 8-foot log. For example: It has already been mentioned that kiln run 88 was
made on material from three logs of shipment 504. They were the ar-b and i-j bolts of tree 2
and bolt e-f of tree 3. The average property was determined for each bolt separately and the
values given in the table are the averages of the bolt averages.
The four succeeding tables (Tables 2 to 5 inclusive) tabulate improvement ratios. They
are obtained by different groupings of the data according to the points to be brought out. The
first three of these tables (2, 3, and 4) pertain only to shipment 504, for which the air-dry tests
completing the work h ave been made.
TABLE

2.- Improvement ratio, Sitka spruce, air·dried and kiln·dried, wilh and without adjustment to
moisture.'

11

per cent

Dry streRgth
Improvement ratlo- Green strength
Shipment 504.
Alr-dry shIpm en t 325.

Air-dry to
m atch kiln
88 and
89.

nUlS

P roperties.

1ti

Kiln run 88.

Kiln run 89.

Air-d r t o
match In
runs 91, 93,
and 94.

Kiln run 91.

Kiln run 93.

Kiln run 94.

I. R. I. R. I .R. I. R. I. R . I . R. I. R. I.R. LR. I . R. I. R. I. R. I.R. I. R. I. R. I.R.
as
as
as
as
as
ad·
ad·
as
ad·
ad·
ad·
as
ad·
ad·
8S
adtested. justed. tested. sted. tested . justed . tested. justed. tested. justed. tested. justed. tested. justed. tested . justed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - -

STATIC BENDING.

Fiber stress at elastic
limiL ..... .... ...... ..
Modulus of ruptllfe •..•••
Modulus oC
elasticity • •• .
Work to maximum load .
Total work ..............
rnPACT BENDING, 50.-

2.39
2. 02
1.36
1.63
1.05

1.93
2. 09
1.68
1. 81
1.16
1.30
1. 38
1. 52
1.04 ...... ..

2. 10
1. SO
1.18
1.43

.... ...

2.U
2.03
1. a.
1.54
.85

2.00
1. 88
1. 29
1. 45
.87

1.81
1.22
1.43
.78

1.95
1.78
1.93
1. 75
1.90
1. 78
1.31
1.36
1.21
1.36
1.,(2
1. 42
.78 .. . . - . . .. . ....

1.80
1.91
1.29
1. 76
1.18

1.91
1. 78 1.90
2.26
1.85
1.S.
1.88
2. 12
1.39
1.28
1.39
I.~
1.7.(
1.2{
1.2,(
I.H
1.18 .... . ... .. ...... . .......

1. 76
1.35
1.21

1. 62
1.29
1.18

1. 26
1. 24
1.07

1. 32
1.30
1.08

I.H
1.30
1.1,(

1.37
1. 25
1.12

1.36
1.25
1.05

1. 39
1. 27
1.05

1. 35
1.36
1.21

La.
1.35
1.21

2.70

2.37

2.H

2.35

2.35

2.25

2.50

2. 22

2. 32

2.24

2. 34

2.25

1. 9R

2.05
1.94
1.36
1.3.0

.......

POUND HAlIMER.

Fiber stress at elastic
limit ... ... .... ..... ...
Modulus ot elasticity .•••
Height ot drop • ••. • •••••

1.29
1.34
1.03

1.33
1.38
1.03

1.39
1.39
1.11

1.38
1.38
1.11

1.58
1.55
1.32

1. 49
1.,(6
1.27

COMPR E~O N

PARALLEL
TO GRAIN.

Fiber stress a t elastic
limiL .... .. ...... ... . .
Fiber stress at m aximum
load .. .. ..... .. ........

....... .... -.- ..
2.22

1. 97

..... - . ... . ....
2. 12

2. 37

, Fiber·saturation point-23 per cene.

.... .. . . ..... .
2.07

2.37

. ....... ...... . . .... .. .......
2.,(7

I. R.-Improvement ratio.

2.61

2.92

2.38

27

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

Table 2 presents ratios derived from the properties of material of shipments 325 and 504
as presented in Table 1. Ratios are given both with and without adjustment for moisture
content. The next table (Table 3) was made up for the reason that the original data showed
a consistent variation in the strength properties according as the test specimens came from
near the central or the outer portions of the tree. It was thought that better comparisons
between kiln-dried, green, and air-dried material would be had by using smaller units of matching-that is, by groups more inherently alike. Table 3 gives by inner and outer portions the
properties of each bolt. (" Outer" and "inner" portions are divided by the circumferential
splitting lines as illustrated in fig. 1 (E).) The improvement ratios included are based on
a verage values of properties of bolts.
TABLE

3.-Properties of Sitka spruce, shipment 504 (also improvement ratios with and without adjustment to
cent moisture) .

11

per

SUMMARY OF INNER PORTION OF TREES ONLY.
Impact bending,

Static bending.
Tree
and
bolt.

Seasoning.

50-pound hammer.

C

.
II It
'
ompreSSlonpara e o gram.

Mois· M.o! M.o! Work. ~:;:i Mois- Ht.o! ~i Mois· Sp.gr. M.C.
tests. ture.
R.
E.
tests. ture. drop. tests. ture. test.
S.
- - -- - - - - -- 1 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,000 Inch·
POUnd8 pou."/1d8 pound8
Pound.

2!l-b..
21-J...

Average . .. .......... .. ....... ..

{

~~i

pcr
per
per
Per sguart B~u.are cubic
cent. mch. mch. inch.

G r e e n to}
match ltiln
runs 88 d

~.~f ~: ~
.. :: ...

.....

17 . ...... 4,670
14 ....... 4,640

.... . .

~~.

::::::: : : :

1, 185
1,140

Per
cent. Incht8.

~:::~

5.8
4.9

I

:::

.....

8 ....... 26
9 ....... 18

1,266
1,347
1,589

7.50
7. 41
7.54

~.

:::::::

:~.7

9
7
9

12.8
13.1
12.9

22.7
22.7
25.5

per

Per
cent.

8~u.art

35 ....... 0.336
28 ....... .326

Inch.
2,100
2,050

~~.

:::::::

::::

::::

33
31
43

....

12.7
12.2
12.3

.367
.358
.411

4,590
4,740
4,890

=~=========I~::===:====:==I:====I'==j===t===,====== ==

2a-b . .
21-J ...
3&-1...

{~t~:?ld~}
runs 88 and
89.

15
15
18

12.4
12.1
12.6

8,240
8,220
8,830

Average ............................................... ~12.4 8,430
I.R ...ttest ..... .. ..... .......................... ....... ............ . 1.72
I . R.n..... .... ......... . ...... ... ..... .... . ........ ... ..... .. ...... . 1.85

1,401 7.48~l2."9"""23.6"~12.4---:a79
1.17
1.41 . ......... . ... 1.09 ....... .... ... .......
1.20
1.48 ....... ....... 1.11 ....... ....... .......

4,740
2.16
2.39

1.585
1,515
1,650

5,780
5,140
6.440

~======== ,~ =:===t=====Ic=====i========I==

2a-b .. }
{
2 i-J ... Kiln run 88...
3 e-L.

6
3
6

9.5 10, 100
9.8 9,730
7.6 10,890

8.1
8.5
8.7

5
4
8

9.7
9.5
7.8

27
25
26

11
8
12

t.R~a;ttest·... :::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: ... ~:~. 102~6& \~ . tis ::::::: ... ~:~. 2t~
1. R.n................. ....... . ........ ........ ........ ....... .......
2a-b .. }
2 i-J ... Kiln run 89...
3&-1...

12.1

l~ .. {G~:t~n~~}
runs 91 93
and 94."

Average ...............................................
1 ~-d ..
11-)...
4&-f...

1.27

9,020

1,460
1,720
1, 555

{u.O 11,000
8,530
10.5

t.Rr~1\est·.·...............·.............·.... : :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: .. ~~:~.
1. R.n......................... ........ ................ ....... .......
I1-J.. .
4 &-1...

1.89

1.48 ....... .......

6.4
9.6
8.0

1.97

1.33

18 =
4, 710
18 ....... 5,130
22 ....... 4,620

1,130
1,140
1,094

runs 91 93
and94."

19
23
23

12.0
12.1
12.3

8,220
9,030
8,180

~ :~~. 52~~

:::: :::
..
1.17 ....... ....... .......

=
20

10.0
9.3
U.4

2.26

.308
.361
.401

5,460
5,500
5.180

523~

29
23

14
6
12

~--8 =-1----;-=~
5
6.0
5.6

~~4,8201,i2l

{~.. t~~y ~~}

10.7
.7
13.2

.378
.363
.408

tg1 ::::::: .. ~~:~ . 2Ul ::::: :: .. ~~:~ ... :~~~.
1.52 ....... ....... 1.11 ....... ....... . ......

9i~~~ 1i~~~

7
3
6

9.5
9.0
7.8

9 ....... 19
5 ....... 21

39 .......
49 .......

.341
.327

2.31

2,220
2,210
2,140

5.4 I.............. ~ ....... ;;;;;;;1--:336
7.85
8.22
7.58

1, 450
1,503
1, 414

2,190
4,590
4,930
4,250

8
8
9

11 .8
U .4
13.0

13.8
22.8
21.1

38
41
46

12.8
12.6
12.8

.368
.369
.355

::::::: .. ~~:~. 1t~
~~:~ :~~. 42~~
{"'T "HI If~' T~~' "i~:T .... T"HI .~........ if "ftf 'j~' 'TH~

t.R~ftei.;sC:::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: .. ~~:~.
I . R.n......................... ........ ................ ....... .......

8i~~~ 1i~~ r:~
1. 6

1.32

: ::: ::: ..
...
1.Ob .............. .......

1.52 ....... .......

2.36

2f.36 :::::: : .. ~~:~ ... :~~.
1.38 .............. ,.......

52~:~

21
24
24

.376
.355

5,710
5,580
5,960

::::::: .. ~~:~ ... :~~~.

52~~

====================,i=========I====I===~ ================I====I'==="===I========

Ht:.: }

Kiln run 91. ..

t.R~eiest::::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: .. ~~:~.
I . R.ll..... . ................... ........ ................ ....... .......
1 1 c-d..
li-J ...
4 &-1...

}Kiln

{
run 93...

4
2
2

U.2
12.4
10.0

t.R~ft\est·... :::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: .. ~~:~.
I . R.n ...............................................................
lc-d .. ~{
1I-J ... Kiln run 94...
4 &-1...

1
3
1

9i~gg \~~~ ~~8~ ::::::: .. ~~:~.
1.94

7,780
9,480
9,610

1.38

1,552
1,450

8i~ 1i~:~

1.38

6.8 1l,090
9,4 9,120
10.9 9,560

1.255
1,436
1, 426

tR~tiesC:::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: ... ~:~. 92~~ \~~
1.86

1.91 ....... .......

1,620'! ~

1.88

I. R.n......................... ........ ................ ....... .......

1

1.19

7.5
8.8

3
2
2

10.2
11.0
9.6

i:ia ::::::: .. ~~:~ .

1.34 ..............
13.1
7.2
6.6

I~
4
1

7. 7
8.9
10.0

tg7 ::::::: ... ~:~.
1.55 ....... .......

1

~:g6

8
4
4

~I~
12.8
10.3

1.24 ............. . .......

31
32
29

3~:~

2
6
2

7.1
7.7
9.3

.379
.377
.374

::::::: ... ~:~ ... :~~~.
1.55 ....... ....... .......

2.50

2.79

7,620
7, 170
5,760

63~

2.49

28
T ABLE

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

3.-Properties of Si tka spruce, shipment 504 (a lso impro v~ment ratios with and without adjustment to
cent mo~sture-Contmued.

11

per

SUMMARY OF OUTER PORTION OF TREES ONLY.
Impact bending, 50- Compression parallel to grain.
pound hammer.

Static bendiug.
T ree
and
bolt.

Seasoning.
N um Mois·
ber of
tests. ture.

M. of

R.

Ht .0 f ber of M01S' S p.gr. M .C
Num·
.
M. of Work. N um· M'
bero!
OlS·
.
E.
test s. tore. drop. tests. turc. test.
S.

- - - - - ---1--1-----1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,000

Inch-

Pound8 pound8 pound8
per
per
per
P er s9uare 3guare cubic

2 !i-b .. { G ~t~hn ~
s88and
21-j ...
3 e-f.. .

89.'

Average ... ..... .•........ . . . ...... . ........... . . .. .. . .

}

cent.

mch.

23 ... . ... 5,360
19 ....... 5,250
22 ...... . 4,750

~~

mch.

inch.

1, 285
5· 7
1,1395. 8
974
5.0

5, 120

1,133

8,854
8,550
8, 050

1,381
1,374
1, 166

Per

cent. Inches.
8 ... .... 23
7 . ..... . 20
5 ....... 19

Pound I
pu
89uare

Per

cent.
36
29
43

tnch.

0.347
2,380
.3372,300
.335
1,970

5.51~ ~~~~--:a40

2,2]7

==:==:==='1==1=1==1
===========
2a-:b ..
21-J...
3e-f...

{Ai~at%y ki~ }
uns 91 93
~nd94."

20
19
21

12.1
12.0
12. 5

8.02
8.01
6. 13

7
9
6

12.7
12.5
13.2

24
21.5
17.7

28
27
36

12.6
12.3
13.0

.380
.364
.365

4,860
4,850
4,130

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1 - - - - -

Average . ...... .. ........ . ..... ........ .. .. ..... ....... ....... 12.2 8,485
I.R.attest. ...................................... . .......•...•..... 1. 66
I. R.n ...........•....... . . ..... ...... . .................. . ........... 1.76
2 a-b" I}
{19
2 i-j.. . Kiln run 88...
9
3 e-I...
17

1,307
1. 15
1.17

7. 39 ... .. .. 12.8 21.1 .. . . .. . 12.6
.370
1.34 ..... ....... •. 1.02 .............. . ......
1.38 . ..... .. ... . .. 1.02 .. ...................

9.9 10,580 . 1,565 \ 8.7
8.7 11,620 1,706
9.5
8.8 9,230 1,344
6.5

20
9
18

9.8
8.9
8.8

24
26
20

I

37
19
39

10.3
9.0
8.7

.388
.375
.369

4, 613
2. 08
2.33

5,480
5,740
5,170

------------------------

t.~~a.!t\est·.::::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: ... :: ~ . 102:~ li~~

1. R.ll ........ .. .... .... .............. . .. .. . . ........ ..... ... ... . . ...

::~. ~j2 ::::::: ... ::~ ... :~::. 52:~g
1.10 ....... ....... .......
2.20
==1====
16
12. 1 22
31
10.2
.386
5,560

U9 : : ::::: ...
1.41 . . ............

1. 86

1.30

11. 8 9,520
8.8 10, 400
13.9 7, 270

1,442
1,523
1,177

8.4
8. 9
5. 8

Average ........................... . ...... .... ... ...... ...... . 11.5 9,060
I.R.attest ...... . ... .. . ......... ... ... . ......... .. . . ................ 1.77
T. R.ll...... ... ... .. .. ... ...... ........ .. ....... .... ... ... . . .. ... . .. . 1. 1

1,382
1.22
1. 23

7.7 . .. ... . 12.0 20.7 •...... 10.6
.368
1. 40 .............. 1.00 ... . .............. ...
1.42 . . ... .. ....... 1.00 .... . .. ....... .......

5,090
2. 29
2.23

945
1,095

5.2
5.2
5.8

2,180
2,230
2, 180

2 a-b . . }
{
2 i-j. .. Kiln run 89...
3e-I...

16
15
17

13
16

9.2
14.8

23
17

30
37

9. 1
12.6

.358
.360

5,630
4,090

I- ------1- --------------

1 ~ ..
I1-J. ..
4 e-f...

{ runs 91,k~
G
~:t~h'"
93,

}

94.

17 .... . .. 4,700
18 . .. . ... 4,920
26 ....... 4,830

990

7 .... ... 18
7 ....... 17
11 .. . .... 21

35 .......
32 .......
45 .......

.334
.333
.345

----1-------------------

Average .......... .. ............ ;.;;;:
4 e-I...

{.~~;~.~~. }.... ;~ ... ;~.~. ;;;~ I;;;~;
and 94. "

29

12.9

8, 110

1,199

=~

;:;g ..... ~... ;~.;. ;.; .~ .. ;~.~. ;:~ ~;;~
6.84

5

12.6

17. 2

41

13.3

.365

4,200

~=~1-:-;=~~1 4,453

Average . ........... ..... ...... ..... .. ... ... .... ...... .
8,350 1 ],342
I.R.attes t.. .............. . .. .... .... 93and94 .... . ......... .... . 1.73
1. 33
1.33 .............. 1.05 1.....................
2.02
1. R.n ............................................................... ~~~.:..:..:.:.:..:.:..:..:.:.:..:~.:..:..:.:.:..:.:..:..:.:.:..:.:..:..:.:.:..:~
1 C-d .. }
{
1 i- j ... Kiln run 91...
4 e-f...

10.9
9.6
12.0

9, 800
9, 620
8,300

1,425 ----u.6--11
1,315
8.9
8
1,288
6.1
11

6

J

12
8
14

11.1

8,840

1,265

8,990

1,441

ll.1~~1Q.3-:3s21 5'190
8.5
11. 6

21
19

16
31

9.3
10.7

.355
. 367

5,110
4,810

10. 5

17

11

11.4

.360

4,770

-----------------------Average ...................................................... 10.8 9,240 1,343
8.9 ....... 10.4 21.0 ....... 10.1
.360 1 5,040
t ~:,~~.~~.t...... ::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: ::::::: U5 L~ U~ ::::::: ::::::: U~ ::::::: ::::::: ::::::: ~:i~
1 C-d .. }
{
4
10.2 8,930 1,458
6. 6
4
10.6 20
8
12.0
.350 I 5,040
li-j .. . Kiln run 93...
6
U . B 9,210 1,600
7. 4
6
11.2 25
10
11.7
.363
5, 710
ie-t...
Average ......................... .... ........ .. ........

~1Lo

i: ~:,~:.~~s.t..::::::::::::::::::r :::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: :::::::
1 C-d .. }
{
li-j ... Kiln run 94. ..
4 e-t.. .

6
6
8

L~

U~

9.5 10,020
9. 810,800
9.4 10,280

1,530
1,720
1,435

Average ................ .. ........ .... . .. .............. ~-0.61O,370

1, 562

i: l,~:.~~~t. . :::::::::::::::::: :::::::: :::::::::::::::: ::::::: :::::::

i:~ U~

6. 2

5

6.7~1Q.8~~--u:7~1 5'170

u: ::::::: :::::::
7.3
8. 1
6.9

9
5
8

9.2
9.7
9. 1

Ln ::::::: ::::::: :::::::

24
28
21

18
12
18

7.8
9.0
8.3

.366 1 6,200
.379
6, 880
.374
5,910

"'"7:4-------g,a24.3~s:4~1

U~

::::::: ::::::: Ug ::::::: ::::::: :::::::

Explanation of ter ms etc.:
Moisture content based on oven-dry weight
M. of R .=Modulus of rupture-pounds per square inob.
M. of E.=Modulus of elasticitY-l,OOO pounds per square inch.
Wk.- Work to maximum load-inob·pounds per cubic Inch.
M. C. S.=Maximum crushing strength-pounds per square inch.
Ht. of drop= Height of drop of 5O·pound hammer t o complete failnre-Inches .
dry strength
I. R.= Improvement ratio= green strength
1. R.1l= Improvement raticr-adjusted to 11 per cent moisture.
Sp. gr. test~Specific gravity based on oven-dry weight and volume as tested.

~: ~

6, 330

~:~

29

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

Improvement ratios based on a still further subdivision of the unit for matching are shown
in Table 4. These are derived from some of the values shown in the preceding table. Only
the extreme lower and upper bolts from among those available are included, so that the trees
2 and 3, having only the bolts e-f, are not represented. Tables 3 and 4 serve the purpose of
detecting differences, if any exist, between the effect of drying on material from different parts
of the trees, and are useful in supporting the conclusions reached from the study of ratios based
on the general properties shown in Table 2.
T A BLE

4.-Swnmary of improvement ratios according to bolts-Sitka spruce-shipment 504.
and 94 and air dry to matCh.

Kiln runs 88, 89, 91, 93,

Inner portion.
Lower holt , A-B or
Properly.

Tree
No.

Seasoning.

C-D.

Bolts.

1. R. as

tested.
1

Outer portion.

Upper bolt, I-J.

Lower bolt. A-B or
C-D.

Upper bolt, I-I.

1. R. ad·

1. R. as

tested.

1. R. ad·
justed .

1. R. as

tested.

1. R. ad·
justed .

1. R. as
tested.

1. R. ad·

2

3

4

I>

6

7

8

justed.

lusted.

--------- ------ -----Air dry to mlltch kiln
runs 88 and 89.

A-B, I-I. . ..

t. 76

t. 90

1.77

1.87

1.65

1.74

1.63

1.71

K'in run 88 ... ' ........
Kiln run 89 ... . ........

2
2

A-B, I-I. ...
A-B, I-I ....

2.16
1.82

1. 98
1.82

2.09
2.37

1.96
2.29

1. 97
1. 78

1.86
1.86

2.22
1.98

1. 95
1.78

Air dry to mntrh kiln
runs 91, 93, and 94.

C-D, I-J . .. .

1.74

1.83

1. 76

1.86

1.80

1. 97

1. 73

1.84

Kiln ntn 91. . ......... .
Kiln run 93 ............
Kiln run 94 ..... .. .....

M.ofR . .......

2

C-D, I-J ....
C-D, I-J ....
C-D, I-J ..

1.65
2.35

... ··i"67· . ····i.. 85· ·····2."00·

2.07
1.83
1. 97

1.95
1. 87
2.19

1.82
1.96
2.04

1.09

1.21

1.23

1.20
1.11

1.50
1.34

1. 41
1. 28

1. 62

1. 27

1.30

1.86

1. 78

1.66

2.08
1.90
2.14

- - -- - -----

Air dry to m atch kiln
runs 88 and 89.
M.o/E .... ....

2

A-B,I-J ....

1.07

1.08 1

1.18

1.20

1.08

Kiln run .......... . .
Kiln run 89 .... . . ..... .

2
2

A-B, I -I. ...
A-B, I- J ....

1.34
1.23

1.30
1.23

1.33
1. 51

1. 30
l. 48

1. 22
1.12 /

Air dry to match kiln
runs 91, 93, and 94.

1

C-D, I- J ....

1.28

1. 31

1.32

1.36

C-D, I-J ... .
C-D, I- J ....
C-D, I-J ... .

1.43
1.11

1.44
1.08

1.36
1.26

1. 42
1.23

1. 51
1.54
1. 62

1.51
1.50
1. 54

1.20
1.46
1.57

1.18
1.50
1.51

2

A-B, I-J ....

1.29

1.34

1. 51

1. 57

1.41

1. 46

1. 38

1. 42

2
2

A-B, I- J ....
A-B, I- I. ...

1. 40
l.10

1.35
1.10

1. 73
1.96

1.65
1. 91

1.53
1. 47

1. 48
1.51

1.64
1.53

1. 52
1. 41

C-D, I-J ... .

1. 74

1.83

1.37

1. 41

1.36

1.43

1.48

1.55

2.22
1.25
1.35

1.71
1.42
1.56

1. 62
1. 46
1.50

2.11

2.31

Kiln run 91 ............
Kiln run 93 ... . ...... ..
Kiln run 94 ............
Air dry to mat~h kiln
runs 88 and 89.
Kiln run88 ............
Work .......... Kiln run 89 .... ... .....
Air dry to match kiln
rum 91, 9.1, and 94.
Kiln run 91. . . .. ..... ..
Kiln run 93 . .... .... .. .

1. 52 /

1 C-D, I-I. ...
1 C-D, I-J ....
1 I C-D, I-J ....

1.15
2.91

1.15
2.20

1.25
1.20

1.29
1.17

23
2. 27
1.
1.40

1

I::~;t:4~~:;~.~~.

2

A-B, I-J . . . .

2.19

2.48

2.31

2.54

2.04

2.28

Kiln run . . ..........
Kiln run 9 ............

2
2

A-B, I-J ....
A-B, I-J ....

2.75
2.60

2.46
2. 42

2.50
2.68

2. 19
2.37

2.30
2.34

2.20
2.22

2.49
2.45

2.18
2.17

Air dry to match kiln
runs 91, 93, and 94.

C-D, I-J ....

2.06

2.34

2.23

2.52

2.07

2.35

2.08

2.39

Kiln run 91. ... ....... .
Kiln run 93 . ... ........
Kiln run 94. ...... .....

C-D, I-J ....
C-D, I-J ....
C-D, I-J ....

2.52

2.38
2.31
2.84

2.29
2.49
2.28

2.30
2.36
3.08

2.07
2.71
2.62

runs 88 and 89.

M.C.S ..... ...

..... :i . 57· ·····2.. 80·
3.42

2.53

2.52
3.24

·····2."97·

- - -- - -

Air dry to match kiln
ntns 88 and 89.

Ht.ofdrop .....

2

A-Il, I-J ....

.87

.85

1.26

1. 32

1. 04 1

1.05

l. 07

1.08

Kiln run 88 . ...........
Kiln run 89 ............

2
2

A-B, I- I. ...
A-Il. I-J ....

1.038

.77

1.03
.78

1.39
1.61

1. 34
1. 49

1.04
. 96

1.04
.96

1. 30
1.15

1.25
1.13

Air dry to match kiln
runs 91, 93, and 94.

1

C-D, I-J ....

.92

.92

1.20

1.21

1.11

1.12

1.25

1.28

1.28
1.11
1.33

1.28
1.11
1.28

1. 24
1. 47
1. 64

1.20
1.48
1.56

Kiln run 91. ...........
Kiln run 93 ............
Kiln run 94. ...........

C-D, I-J ... .
C-D, I-J ....
C-D, I-J ... .

.... ·i .. 4i>· .... ·i.":ii· ... ··i .. i6· .. ···i .. i6·
2.06

1. 76

1.68

1.56

Explanation of terms
M. of R.= Modulus of rupt ure, static bending.
M. of E.=Modulus of elasticity, static bending.
Work= Work to maximum load, static bending.
M. C. S.-Maximum crushing strcngih, compression paraliclto grain.
fit . of drop=Hcight of drop, impact bending.
I. R.-Improvemcnt ratio.
Improvement ratios adjusted to 11 per cent moisture.
Fl DeNaturation point= 23 per cent.

30

AN N U AL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE F OR AERONAU T ICS.

The improvement ratios for m aterial from shipments 563 and 578 (Table 5), for which
the air-dried m aterial is not yet ready for test, are obtained in a somewhat different manner .
The ratios are computed for individual double bolts, but without sub division into inner and
outer portions fo1' each kiln run. The averages for the ratios for the several bolts are then
regarded as the improvement ra tios corresponding to the kiln run. The ratios were so derived
for kiln runs 147,148, 163, 171 , and 172, and are shown in Table 5.
T ABLE

5.-Improvement ratios according to bolts (adjusted to 11 per cent moisture).

(Sitka sprllce: Kiln runs 147 and 148, shipment 563, and kiln runs 163, 171, and 172, shipment 578.1
Impact bending,
50-pound hammer.

Static hending.
Tree and
bolt.

Seasoning.

Work to
M.ofE.
M.ofR.
maximum load.
Mols· 1----;---1 -- -- 1
---;----1 Mols·
ture.
1. R .
I. R.
I. R
I. R.
1. R.
I. R.
ture.
M
~
M
~
M
~
testcd lusted. tested. justed. tested. justed.

I

- - - - - - - 1 -- - -1 · - - la-b ... . ..
I c-<l.. . ...

lGinrun 147(ship. 563)

l~.~~

~ ~~:: ::::

Ayerage ... .. .. .. .

P er ct.
11.6
11.2

i8
:g

..::: : : .... 9..

1
1
Kiln run 148 (ship. 563). 2
2
5

a-b .. . .. .
c-<l .. ....
a-b......
c-<l . .....
c-<l......

1

Average .. .. .... . ............
Kl
163( h' 578) {2 c-d..... .
S lp.
. 3 e-I......
l nruu
Average . ... .. . .. .... ... .. . ..
I
Kiin
171 ( h' 578) 4
run
s lp.
. {5
6

a-b......
a-b .... ..
a-b......
a-h......

-

Height 01
drop.
I. R.
1. R.
M
~
tested. justed.

- - - _ ··_ - - - - - - -

1.~

1. 7

l: ?~

1.91
]. 9

U~

1.40
1.01

:~

1

~. ~:~ ~::: ~::: \

1.43
1.84
1.90
1. 01 .. ........ .. ....

:~

... ~:~~.... ~:~~.

:::

~::

:::

1. 10
1.27
1.22
. 93

1. 71
1. 29
1.50
1.17

Per ct.
12.7
10.5

Compression parallel
to grain .
Max.cr.
strength.
Mois· 1---;---t ure.
I. R.
1. R.
M
~
tested. j usted.

--------1.21
1.36

1.25
1.35

Per ct.
12.5
11.1

~ ::~

: ::

~

1. i2
1.27
1. 44
1.17

Ig:~

U~

U~

~n

2. 10
2.07

2.34
2.08

::: \

::10

2.09
2.42
2.49
2.03

2.36
2.42
2.79
2.13

2.20

~

~:~§

U~

= = = = = = = =1 ==1===1===1===:= 2.39
= . 89 .87 13. 8 1. 95 =
12.6
1. 64
1.77
1.16
1. 19
1.55
1. 66
13. 1
11. 1
10.1
9.7
10.9

1.75
1.94
2.04
1. 64

~~
12. 8
12.4

1.76
1.61

1. 75
1. 85
1. 90
1.64

1.78
1.95
1.71

1. 10
1.29
1. 24
.93

11. 0
U. 5
11.2
12.0

1.05
1.19
1.19
.85

1. 05
1.20
1. 19
.84

12.7
11.0
12. 3
11 .8

~~---w4l.45~~~~
1.14
1. 1.';

1. 17 \
1. 17

1.34
1. 17

1. 41
1.19

10.0
11.4

.94
1.00

.94
1.00

12.9
11.5

1.81 1
1.74

2.02
1.78

~ 1. 68
~1':'i6I-w5~~--:97--:97~-u7-w9
1=====================' ===~f===~I'~=I====~I=====F====F====i=====
10.6
2.06
2.01
1.17
1. 16
1.65
1. 63
10.7
.85
.85
10.0
2.41
2.25
10.6
1.93
1. 89
1. 39
1.37
1.44
1. 42
13.0
.84
.81
10.0
2.67
2.47
9.2
2. 10
1.91
1. 34
1.29
1.42
1.36
9.4
. 84
.86
9.0
2.46
2.16
9. 1
2. 12
1.91
1. 44
1.37
1.67
1. 56
9.7
1.19
1. 17
9.2
2. 54
2.25

1:2

- - -2.05 -1.- -1.33 -1.30 1.- -1.- ........ - .93 - .93 ........ -2.52 - 2.27
- 93 - -- 54 49 -- - - -- - -

A'i'erage .... .. . .. .. .......... ........
I a-h.. . ...

=============
9. 9

:=t:::: 12.1
i8:g

Kiln run 172 (ship. 578). { ~
6 a-h . ....

2.08

1.96

1. 29

2. 03

U:6 Ug
2.18
1. 35

2.06

2. 0 1

~:~

1.27

1. 29

1. 39

1.53

1.60

1.31

1.43

U~

L~

1. 27

9.7

. 2

.84

10.2

1.19

1.18

1. 41 ........

.89

U~

Ig:~

:~

l8:g
10. 1

2.36

2. 49

2. 66

2.48

.90 ........

2.48

2.41

:~

U.7

U~

~j~

- - - - - - - - - - - -- - -- - - - -- 1 - - - - -

Average....... .. .... ........ .. .. ....

1.32

M. of R .- Mod ul us of rupture.
M. 01 E. - Modulus of elMticity .
Max . cr. strength-Maximu m crushing strength.
I . R.-Improvement ratio.
Fiher·saturation p?int-23 per cent.

The improvement ratios as given in T ables 2, 3, 4, 5, and 10 are put into graphical form
in figures 8, 9, and 10. Figure 8 also shows ratios for air seasoning of a closely allied species,
red spruce, based on data from a bulletin of the Forest Service. l In figure 8 the values plotted
for previous air-dry tests of shipment 325 and the values of improvement ratios shown by dotted
lines (shipment 504, kiln r uns 88, 89, 91, 93, 94) are from Table 2. The last five ratios under
each property are the average values t aken from T able 5. Ratios from Table 3 are also graphed
in this figure .
The ratios of Table 4 are plotted in figure 9. Figure 10 shows the ratios, by individual
bolts, for runs 147 and 148, from Table 10. This figure is included because of th e bearing of
these ratios on the question of the effect of high temperature.
DISCUSSION.
COMPARISON OF KILN-DRIED WITH MATCHED AIR-DRIED MATE RIAL.

The outstanding fact indicated by figure 9 and by that part of figure 8 pertaining to m aterial
for which air-dr y tests are available (shipment 504) is the 'V ery general excellence of the m aterial
which has been kiln dried, as compared in each case with the corresponding air-dried stock.
Irrespective of the unit of matching, whether matched by units of three whole bolts, by the
mner and outer portions for three bolts, or by inner and outer portions for individual bolts,
1

Forest Service Bulletin 70, The EJIect of Moisture on the Strength and Stillness ot Wood.

31

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

the excellence of the kiln-dried material is general
with respect to all of the five properties.
The conclusions as to the relative merits of the
various kiln runs are:
(1) Of the two runs 88 and 89 made on the
same group of material, 89 is the poorer, although it
is better than the corresponding air-dry except in compression parallel, and possibly also in height of drop.
(2) In the other group of material (including
runs 91, 93, and 94) kiln run 94 shows, with most con_
sistency, the highest improvement ratio. Taking all
the properties into consideration, it is difficult to choose
between runs 91 and 93. If, however, we base a decision on the highly important properties of work to
maximum load and height of drop, it would be concluded that run 91 is the better, in spite of the higher
temperature used throughout the run.
It will be noticed that the air-dried material of
the group matching runs 88 and 89 shows about the
same improvement over green as does that of the
group matching runs 91, 93, and 94, and that they
differ considerably less from each other than they do
from the air-dry of the previous shipment, 325. The
property which is an exception to this statement is
the very variable and less important one of modulus
of elasticity. This brings out the point that, while
the relative suitability of the several kiln runs can be
determined by intercomparison of the improvement
ratios, it is not possible to state positively that any
of them give improvements equal or superior to those
to be obtained by air drying until matched air-dried
material has actually been tested. To illustrate: If
tests on the air-dried groups matching kiln runs 88,
89, 91, 93, and 94 were not available, and judgment
of these runs had to be based on a comparison of their
improvement ratios with those of the previously tested
air-dry of shipment 325, and without any allowance
for variability, the condusion would b e reached that
of these runs 94 alone had yielded stock equal or
superior to air-dry. It is now evident that such a
comparison would be misleading. It so happens that
in this instance this method of comparison is safe, in
that it does not give a false idea concerning the safety
of kiln-drying. On the other hand, it might happen
that such a comparison would lead to the conclusion
that a given drying process was entirely safe, when
such was not the case. However, in making such
comparisons careful consideration must be given to
the variations to be expected. This was done in the
first analysis of the effect of runs 88,89,91,93 , and 94,
and the conclusion was reached that, with the possible
exception of run 89, all had given satisfactory results.
That all the runs, 89 included, have given satisfactory results is indicated by the data presented herein.

~
...

O/~"..Y ,LN3H.7AOO'o'W/
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
,

, , ,

~

I

"'nb' N71.J(

I?LI

I

ILl Nnu N71y

I

G'9 1 NnO' N7/)1'
fiJ1' 1 Nn& N71X

.

m

II

LvI ""IV:! N71J1

N 7/Y
N7/}t'

fi

16 Y/f' !>NIH:J.i. P'W

.

'1

~O'o HIP'

6@Nnb'N1lj1

pg

I

Nfly N7ljf

iY JI ON/N:U tr"h' :A.N(7l:(IV

6&1"W

1 I" /$'''''-''',,",'>':'<>'0",,'''
.I'JlJddS" O.7b'
1 1
I Z~III"?b'N1IK
! l ll1 'Vl?ttNT/)f'

•
i
<I
~

~
~

~

0

~
~

~

~

~
~
Il <\' "' ~
<0 ~
~
~
...

•

~

f9 1'VI"IO'N7IH
9-;I N n (l 1ll7Q1

~
!:i
~
Clj

l 'lN ¥nh'N7/,K

I

,

"~
~

"

f;(jN nyN71),1

,

('6 N/18 101)/

1

{. Nf'+!t N 71J1

I6PtOlfill)(IiHQIIW

{

6

69 AlliN

1
I

\::t:~

AI?/y

l}e NfJb' #7/,#

6PPr;r;HJI~O~1¥

~~rdIH~ ;"d(JHW

lL INnO' N7IJI

1

ILIHnb'NlI~

1

r

f91N''lb' N71.J1
gf'I NnaN7/
~

'1'1 Nny

!' Ii ION.

l'6Nnt/1V7/J1

I

~
r

N7/~

";6'Nflt/N ·II).1

I

Ic:!I-t6Pli
I r:
.

iJ.HO d/Y

6fi'

/tI7IK

flgH 8 N71)t'
G,, 9f/9N)t'A.b"OIHt;'

I

IrT

SZf' diNS MO tll~

If
IT

ZLllVnC' /V71).1
ILI·V"~N71),1

f9Itvn d N7O;

t

~/lYnh'

\J
i:::

I

N71.)('

L # INnC'N7IJt'

~~
Il ~~
+6 Nnt:l N7l#

I

GfiNnHN71)1

)(.Att,

r;::

~

"

II/V

69 Nntl'lnlH

179 NnC' /fl1,W

r

1

6tl PUll N)I AH(j¥I¥
'Zf:al"'~ ~ONIIT
7Jt?b'd~ 020'

ZLI Nny N71)/

II

ILI N/'Il!{ /V7/Y
F'91 Nnt/ N"T1.w

fJH"'n¢ N'71J1
';~/lYnb' N71)(

.,,6 1Y/'I.yN7I);'

£6N/lb' N71.J.1

;
-I

/5 lYnN N'l/)'l'
6f1C6"/.

H}I()f(/~r'P/~dl¥

69/.1/'1O'N7I.;,/

99 Nn,yN71)1
169WPN j/!)NIN:J..LYj.A,I :A. a-O b'IV

I

~ ~

Is~c dlj./~ ',,(,yO,y/¥

1 / / P"""'''.> O".!I
~ ~ ~ '" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
,
01.1 1"0' .LNJI'IJAOtlclWI

82

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

The above conclusions h ave b een arrived at by a consideration of the ratios shown in
figures 8 and 9, mentally balancing a deficiency in one property against superior excellence in
another. While it is necessary to exercise care in any attempt to reduce comparisons to an
exact mathematical basis, it is interesting to note how comparisons on such a basis lead to
practically the same conclusions as given. Table 6 1 gives the results of a computation of the
" efficiencies" of the various runs.

STATIC

8ENf)ING

/~------------------~~~----------------------~,
110~(JL(JS OrI?UPTfJ/?[
l/folCh<dCKrxjD MoIChMG-o!lp
24 ~~

l.l

W/?/(lOAiAl/J/UAIfOA~
O
MO~ULUJ OHIA5T/{ffY ~, Afuftllt1Ctoup

2.0

~

1I[/6IfT or~I?OP

,

fi(am>""'/Noup A-blch<rf6mqp

cJl.IJ

I

~~

f:: /.6

I

--

~ 1.4

~ I.Z

I

- -

-

~ /.O
~ 8

-

>.

?6

~

~ .4

~

~
~

~ ~
~ ~

'"

.2

'"

.., ,.
'" '" '"

~

>.

Q:

~ ~

"-

"

'"

Cl
~

~

"

>.

'"" ~

9:

~

~

~

'>:

~

J

>.

.,
'"

~
~

"

"-

'"

~

~

..

~
~

'I:

~

'"

~

~

"

/.

,
~

.... :;: ~

'"

~

i~

"

'I;

J

!

I
I

,
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

J
I

J
f

& '"
"

IZ
8

I

I
I

I

ZZ

I

I

I

I

10

I
I

I

I
I

I

I
I

I
I.

/.8 "l

:

I

/.6

I

t

I

I

I.f ~

I

I

J

>.

~

~

'<:

~

'"

'"

~

~ ....
~

"

'"

..,

>.

~

"

'" '"

9:

'Ii

<Q '"

., 1<0

~ .... I:;; ~
~

'I;

'"

~

~

~

'!;

'"

'0
'"

~ ....
~

"(

..,

I. O
~

>.

~

, '" ~~ '"

~

'" '"

'0

~

"-

<Q

"

'{

~

1.Zh.

I

>.

26
14

~
I

I

I

'""

.

I

I

~

~

I

J
I

i~

'"

~

"'>

'"

>.

'<

'"

~

'" ~

~

'I;

"

0,

..,
"
'" ''"

~

8 :.:
~
6~

4~
Z

F IG. g.-Improvement ratios for comparing upper and lower bolts and inner and outer portions, Sitka spruce, shipment 504 .
TABLE

6.- Efficimcillil o/ various kiln runs-Sitka spruce-Shi pmm t 504.
Kiln run 88 .

l'roperty.

Kiln run 89.

Ki ln run 91.

Ki ln run 93.

K iln run 94 .

F -----~---- I ----~~----I----~-----I ----~-----I·----~----E

EX F

E

E XF

E

EXF

E

EXF

E

EXF

- - - - - - - - - -1 - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Modulus of ru pture.. . . . .. ..... . . .... 2
Modulus of elasticity ... .. .. . .. . . . ... 4
Work to maximum load . .. .. . . ... . .. 3
Drop ..... .......... .... ..... . ....... 3
Maximum crushing strength . . .. .. . . 2
l: E .. . ....... .... .. . ...... .. ... . .. .. . . . ..
l:E+5= Average E ....... .. .. ...... . . . . .
. .. .

~~~~ ~l:.:iF,;.-weighte(i a~CJ:age ·t:

Per cent.
104. 3
109.0
102.2
L03. 8
93.7
513. 0
102. 6

208.6

43G.0
306. G
311. 4
187.4

... .. ... . - " i;4SO: 0'
103. 6

Per cent.

9 .9

102.5
99.3
97.3
94.5
492.5
98. 5

197.8
410. 0
297.9
291.9
1 9.0
1, 376. G
9 .3

P er cent.
98. 9
94 . 1
122. G
114. 1
95. 0
524. 7
104. 9

.. ....... .

197.8
376.4
367. 8
342. 3
190.0

Per cent.
97. 4
102. 3
87. 4
104.8
110.5

194. 8
409. 2
262. 2
314.4
221.0

502. 4

100. 5
1,474. 3
105. 3 . . . ... ....

P .r cent.
102.3
100.0
95.0
119.9
100. 5
517. 7
103. 5

1, 401. G
100.1 . . . .. . . . . .

201.:)
400.0
? 5.0
359.7
201.0
1,449.9
103. 6

F- Weighting factor.
Improvement ratio for property of kiln-dry
.
E- Effi clCncy- Improvem en t ratio for same property of correspon ding air-dry
1 The weighting factors F used In thi s and other tables are t hose whi ch have been used in computiug a com posi te figure to m easure the suI tability of various species for aircraft use. 'l'he relative importance of the various properties and the applicabi lity of such factors in the present
instance might be subject to some question. However, t h e facts that th e" average e1flciencies" and " weighted average efficiencies" as given in
Table 6 do not diITer significantly, and that both m ethods put the various kiln ru ns in the sam e order, indi cates that, in t he presen t instance at
,cast, any reasonabl e weighting schem e would bring approximat ely th e sam e results.

33

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

Table 6 is derived from figure 8 and with its footnote is self-explanatory. The arrangement of kiln runs in order of descending weighted average efficiencies as obtained from Table 6
is as follows:
Efficienty
(percent).

Air drying. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kiln run 91. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Kiln run 88. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Kiln run 94 ... .. .......... .. . . .... .. ................ . ...... . ............
Kiln run 93. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kiln run 89. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

100. 0
105. 3
103. 6
103.6
100. 1
98. 3

Comparison with figure 3 shows that the above list puts the kiln runs approximately in de cendiug order with respect to temperatures. It is a1 0 notable that, measured by this method, all
runs except 89 gave results uperior to air drying.
TABLE

7.-Efficiencies of various kiln Tuns-Sitka spruce-Shipment 504- Upper bolts.
(A)-OU TER PO RTION.

Kiln run 88.

K iln run 89.

Ki ln run 91.

Kiln run 93.

Kiln run 91.

I------~------- I -----~~----- I-------~------ I ------~------ I------_.-------

F

Property .

E

E

E

EXF

E

E

EXF

EXF

- - - - - - - -- - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - )fodul us of rupture . . .. . ... ... ... . ..
)fodu lus of elastirity............. . ..
Work .... . ..........................
Drop...... ................ .........
Compression. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . .. .

Per cent.

2
4
3
3
2

Per cent.

22r..R
461. 2
321.0
31R. 0

113.4
115.3
107. 0
116. 0
91. 2

I

[().j.0

101.0
99.3
10·1. 5
94.0

.4

1, 545.4
110.4

~m ~B.:;i;F.:.~eiihte(i8Veiag6E:: :::: ::::::::::

Per cent.

208.0
9~. 9
9O.S
416.0
297.9
101. 8
313. Ii
93.5
6. G
1 .0
1,423.4
101.7 . .......

.

[ 97. ~

3(';!.2
3H. 4
280. 5
173. 2
1,329.1
94.9

Pcr eent.

Per cent.

~M:~

106. 5
1l5.2

113.0
116.9
9 ~.9

2S2.3
347. 4
227.0
1,530.5
109.3

In:~

113. 5

121. 6
109.7

220. 0
467. 6
290.7
3(>4.8
219. I
1,568. S
112.0

(1l)-l~~F.R PORTIO~.

Kiln run
Kiln run 9.
Kiln run 91.
Kiln run 93.
Kiln run 94.
Property.
F
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _.1--- __ ' _~ _____ ~ ____ ~ ____ ~ ___ _ ~
E_
E
E
E
E

I

Per cent.

Modulus of rupture. ................

209. c
432.
317.7
Wl.5
172. I
1,437.2
102. 7

104. 9
108.2
10.1.9
10\.5
6.2

~Iodnlusofelastieity. . . .......... ...

Work.. ............... .. .. ... .. . ....
Drop...............................
Compression. ........ . ..............

2
1:(EXF) ....... ........ . .............. ... 1. . ........
1: ( EXF)+1:F=weighteds\'(~ragc E.. .... ...... ....

I

Per ct nt.
122.3
124.0
121. 6
113.0
93.4

Per cent.

Per cent.

Per cent.

214.6........ . . ......... .
107. 5
496.0 .......... ..........
104.3
36·!. ~ ....................
,9. 5
339.2 ........ .. ..........
105.0
1 G. ~ ....................
11 .0
1,63 1.2 ....... . ......................
116.5 .......... ....•..... ..........

21;'.0
417.2
2';~. 5
31.;.0
23,;' 0
I,IJI. 7
103.7

89.2
90.5
, 2. I
128.0
100.0

I 7~ . 4
362.0
2-17.2
381.0
200.0
1,37\.ti
97.9

F - Wei~htillg factor
E- EfflciencvTmprove ment mtio for property of hi ln dry
. Improvement ratio fur same properly of corresponding ai r dry
TABLE

8.-Efficiencies of kiln TUns- itka spruce-Shipment 504--Lower bolts.
(.\ )-OG TER

Kiln run

POR'l'lO~.

Kiln run 89.

F

P roper ty.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.I----E--~ __ _I~
E_,

Per cmt.

Modulus of ru pture................. 2
lOt•. 9
Modulus of cbstieity .... ............·1
110.0
Work ... . .. ......................... 3
101.2
Drop ................... . ..... . ..... 3
9G.1
Compression... ........... ..... ..... 2
96.5
! (b:i(F)............ ............ , .................

1:(EXF)+2:F- weighteda,erageE . . ...

T .........,

213. ~
410.0
303.6
29·1.3
193.0
1,14l.i
103.2

Per cent.
1011. 9
101. 9
103.3
90. 0
974
.

( n)-I~NER

Kiln run
P r operty .

F

I

E

.

EXE'

213. ~
407.6
309.9

Kiln run 91.

I

__

E _
_

~ ____ ~ ___ _ ~
E
E

Per cent.
105.2
93. ~
155.0
114.2

271.~

191

92 G

Kiln run 94.

Kiln run 93.

Per ctnt.
210. 0
375.2
465.0
342. 6
185 2

l,30997:. ~1 , ....•.•.•......•.•.•• 1'''71~2:.07
1
-

Per cen t.

92.9
92. 5
7. 4
100.0

'85.8
370.0
21.2.2
300.0
2'1 0
1,329
,:.0
9, 7

1055

.

100.0
95.0
94·1
114.2
96 5
.

200.0
380.0
283.2
312. 6
193.0
1,39 . 8
99.0

rORTIO:-;r.

Kiln run 9.

Kiln run 91.

Kiln run 93 .

I

Kiln run 94.

E

E

E

I

E

EXF

EXF

'

EXF

EXF

------------1-- - - - - - - ---------------- --- - - - - Modulllsofruplmc ...... .... ...... .
Modulusofelsstbty . . ..............
Work. ..............................
Drop-impact . .. .. . . . ..............
Compression... . ....................

2
4
3
~

2

Per cent.
104.1
120. 2
100.9
12i.0
99. I

i[~~:5:;i;F.:.~~eiihteda·\:e,·agCE:: :::r::::::::

20 . ~

1~0.~

302.7
3H3.n
19 . 2

l"ITi:g

Per Ctnt.
95.7

1~24.· 09

111.7
U7.5

Per ctnt.

191.4 ..........
l59.n . .........
21l1.0 . .... .....
275.1 . . ........
195.0....... . ..

..........
..........
..........
....•.....
..........

Per cent.
91.1
1,\9
2. ~
PS. 9
119.7

'.2

U :::::::::: :::::::::: ::::::::::

1,3U

F= Weighting fuctor
E Bm'
Im 'lrovcment ratio for property of kiln dry
=
oencY= lmprO\'cmcnt ratio for same p roperty of corrc,ponding air dry

136990-20-5

IPer cent.
182.2
4IZ~·.OI
~

416.7
239. I

l.;;g~:~

JO~.I

~I;:~

191.2
1O~. 0

3. n .3
'"
573.6
211>.0

1~2Oq:"I
-

I,m: t

34

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

Tables 7 and 8 pre:sent data similar to those of Table 6, but derived from figure 9. They
show efficiency figures for various sma.ller groups of material. Tables 7 and 8, as would be
expected, disclose considerably greater varia tions than are shown in Table 6. The averages
naturally show variations from those of Table 6. In no case, however, is the drop of these
averages below 100 per cent serious. Some rather low " efficiencies " for individual properties
are found among these figures for smaller groups of material. It is notable, however, that
there are few cases in which both work to maximum load an d drop, or both modulus of rupture
and maximum crushing strength, fall low. It is doubtful also whether such variations as are
found in these tables can be supposed to be the result of the kiln processes. It is more probable that they result from actual inherent differen ces between the kiln-dried and air-dried
material. Such differences are more likely to occur between small groups than between large
ones. In other words, the differences between small groups of tests are likely to have little
meaning, find conclusions as to the effect of the kiln proce as can best be reached from consideration of the larger groups.
Table 6, then, leads to the following conclusions, which are practically the same as those
previously s ta ted:
1. Runs 88, 91 , 93 , and 94 have produced material equ al or superior to material that was
air-dried.
2. Run 9 is probably the poorest of the runs , but may be considered practically equal
to the air-dry.
From os. 1 and 2 would follow:
3. Within the limits used, ll5° to 180 0 F ., the strength properties of Sitka spruce are
independent of the temperature of drying (but see following paragraph).
As has been mentioned, it is to be expected that a given process or set of drying conditions
will have a different effect on different groups of material from the same species, and that it
may be possible for a process to be safe for one group an d very damaging to another. This
expectation has been fulfilled in this series of tests, and consideration of some of the runs yet
t o be discussed necessitates a considerable modification of conclusion No.3 above.
DISCUSSION OF RUNS FOR WHICH DATA ON MATCHED Am- DRIED MATE RIAL ARE NOT Y ET AVAILABLE.

Consideration i now to be given to material from additional kiln runs. Air-dried material
matched to that dried in these runs and tested is no t yet available for test.
Runs 147 and 148.- Two of these runs (147 and 148) are particularly worthy of
at tention.
Run 147 was made on pieces 2t by 2t inches in section , by 4 feet long. The temperature
was 130 0 F. at the beginning and 150 0 F. at the end. The humidity and steaming treatments
were so regulated as to keep casehardening at a minimum. Run 148 was on material from the
same logs as run 147; material was in the form of wide planks 2! inches thick and the temperatures were 160 0 F. initial and 180 0 F. final.
Strength data for these runs are given in Tables 1 and 9. Improvement ratios are shown
in Table 5 and in figure 8. These improvement ratios are based on all the material in each
run as compared to corresponding gre~n material, and serve for a general comparison of these
two with other runs.

35

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.
TABLE

9.-Mechanical properties of Sitka spT'uce.

[Special table ror comparing !dIn runs 147 and 148, shipment 563.J
Static bending.

I
Moisture.!
Kiln runs:

Modulus or
rupture.

Specific grevity.'

Tree and bolt.
Kiln run
147 or
148.

Green.

Kiln run
147 or
148.

Green.

Kiln run
147 or
148.

Modulus or
elasticity.
Kiln run
147 or
148.

Green.

Work to maximum
load.

Kiln run
147 or
148.

Green.

Green.

---------------------------

r
r

c-<1 ...... ..•..•
147 . .•.. •.••.••••.•.•.. 2 a--b ...•.. .• . ...
2 c-<1 ..... .•.....
5 c-<1 ...... .. . . ..
Average . ........ .... .... - .........

c-d ...... ......
148 (outer portion) .... 2 a-b ......... . ..
2 c-<1 ...•... .....
5 c-<1 .. . ...... . ..
Average .... .. ... . .................

Per cent. Per cent.
11.2
40.0
10.5
36.4
10.2
32.2
9.9
37.4

0. 446
.404
.410
. 390

0.423
.382
.392
.365

- - -- - - - -412 - -10.4
.
.391
36.5
12.3
9.8
10.0
11.5

36.0
32.4
51.2
34.3

.445
.409
.418
.375

. 411
.389
.352
. 359

10.9

38.5

.412

.378

1,000
1,000
Pounds Pound.
pound!
pounds
per square per',quare per squar, per aquare
inch.
inch.
inch.
inch.
6,370
1,760
1,745
11,900
9, 460
5, 728
1,323
1, 738
5,630
10, 000
1, 398
1, 302
9,930
5, 355
1, 436
1, 135

- - -- - -- - -- - -- - -- - 5. 40
10, 322
5, 771
1, 455
1,504
7. 6
- - -- - - - - - - - ---........
-10,914
6,579
1,671
1,604 _ ....... . ..
11, 360
11, 741
9,300

5,980
5,709
5, 904

1, 803
1,677
1,220

1, 405
1,358
1,392

10,829

6,043

1,593

Tree and
bolt.

Moisture.!

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

8.6

1, 440

6.49

······6:9· . "·"0: 23

- - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Impact bending, 5O-pound hammer.

Kllnnms.

Inch·
Inch·
pound!
pounds
per cubic per cubic
inch.
inch.
. .... .....
7.4 ' ·" ··4:90
........ ..
7. 7 "·'·'5:00

Green.

Specific grnvi ty.'

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

Green.

Compression parallel to grein.

H eigbt or drop.

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

6.36

7.8

Green .

MoistllIe.!

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

Green.

SpecIfic gravity.'

Maximum crush·
ing strength.

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

Kiln
run 147
or 148.

Green.

Green.

- - - --- - - - - - - --- - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - ---

r
r

c-<1 ...... ..
2
147 . .... . . . .. ..... 2 a-b ........
c-<1 ........
5 c-d ...•....
Average .. .. . -- ...... __ . ..

Per cent. Per cent.
40.2
10.5
35.0
10.0
9.7
32.8
36. 2
10.4

0.445
. 421
.421
.390

0.410
.377
.3 4
.368

--- - - - - -- I .385 36.1
10.1
. 419

c-d .... . . ..
148 (outer por· 2 a-b ....... .
tlon) .... .. .. .. . 2 c-d ........
5 c-d ........

11.2
10.8
10.3
12.0

37.8
31.8
35.4
31.5

.440
. 409
. 414

.388

. 4<Y.1
.389
.395
.362

Average ... • ..... . .. . .....

11 . 1

34 . 1

. 413

. 387

Inches .
38.0
28. 0
31.0
25.5

- -I-

lnche• . Per cent. Per cent.
28.0
11.1
39.0
19.2
10. 8
37.2
20. 0
34.0
11.5
20.4
10. 5
37.5

30.6

21.9

29.0
25. 0
24.0
16.0

28.0
21.0
20.0
20. 0

-zzo

22.0

--10.9

~
10.5
12.4
12.5

12.3

0.430
. 410
.415
.394

0. 408
.384
.389
.364

36. 9

. 412 1

.386

34.6
32 .4
37.8
32. 0

.4371
.407
.418
.383

.410
.389
.3f~
.368

Pound, Pound!
per
per
'quare 'r;:g{e
Inch.
6,515
3, 138
5,270
2,622
6, 230
2, 845
2,850
5,490
5,876

2,864

6, 850
6,670
5,170

3,03
2,827
2,693
2,747

= 6,176

~~I-----:3s6 6,W

1 P er cent moisture based on oven-dry weight .
• Specific greVIty based on oven-dry weigbt and volume as tested.

2,826

---

Figures better suited to the comparison of runs 147 and 14 are given in Table 9. Improvement ratios derived from them are given in Table 10 and gnliphed in figure 10. These
data differ from those of Tables 1 and 5 and figure chiefly in that run 147 included no material
from the central portions of the various bolts, so that in making Tables 9 and 10 and figure 10
tests on material from such central portions dried in run 148 were excluded in order to get the
best possible comparison of the two runs.

36

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITT EE F OR AERONAUTICS.

co. ~6>£ f>'S blv
I~;::

f4L

EL

MA Ire;; sr; 10M Til

' -,.

..s irA

Ie EJ ~N. P/;'\ G

<J
, ~

V'\

/
2.8 1

1M

2.6
2 .4- MO b.o

2.2 ~
~

~

<)0

"

IWOR

18 .

Q:.

~

.~
l<J

S

M O .OF ~LA TIC TY

,

1.4

"il

9

"b

I\J

I\J

"l

,!,
<II

~

I¥'

· T

INC

~

'9
'-)

~x.

/II. '6/1

'9

~

~

""

OJ 01"

0.

'9 ~

9

!S,

i\;

'"

"'"

C\j

""
f-

/,2

1.0.

r-

0.8

~

TO
~DA

'l
~
I

/.6

~

I

~

~

~

~

~

OJ£; 'D

I"T. IT£.

'9 9 ~

2.0

h:

iT

l'h l'h
I

0.6
04
0.2

'f.~ "-Q:> ~~ ,,"- "-Q:>
~~
~~ ~~

"

"Q:> "-<0 ,,<\) ,,<\) "-<t>
~:t ~:-t ~~ ~~ ~~

,,-q;,

~Ii
:tl ~ ~~ ..... '

"-Q;)

,,~

~~

~~ t~ :t::t tl~
"-<\) "-'I)

~~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~::t
,""-

,

0

F IG. 10.- Improvement ratios for comparing kiln runs 147 and 148, Sitka spruce.
TABLE

lO.-Improvement ratios according to bolts (adjusted to

11

pel' cent moisture).

[Sitka spruce: Kiln runs 147 and 148, shipment 563.J
Impact bending, 50pound hammer.

Static bending.

Seasoning.

Tree and.
bolt.

Mois·
ture.

Mod ulus oC
rupture.

Modulus of
elasticity.

Work to
maximum
load.

t
1. R as I. R
1. R as LR. 1. R.ss LR.
ad·
ad·
ad·
tested. justed . tested. justed. tested. jus t ed.

- - - - - -- 1 · - - - -·1 - - - -- -'1 a-b
1 c- d
2 a-b
2 c-d
5 c-d

Average ... _... .. ............
.
148' < h'
KIln )nm
SIp.
563 .. . ....... .....

I a-b
1 c-d

1

2 a- b
2c-d
5 c-d

Average ...... . .... ...... ....

Maximum

Height oC
drop.
Moisture.

LR.
adtested. justed.

r. R.ss

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - --

P er ct.

Compressi0l!- parallel to
gram.

Per ct.

Mois·
ture.

crushing
strength.
1. R.
adtested. justed.

r. R.as

- - -- - Per ct.

' ''ii:i' " ' i:S ' ''i:S9' " 'i:oi' '''i:oi' :: :::::: :::::::: '''io:5' ''' i: a6' '''i:35' '''iij' ' ''2:07' .... 2:08
7'
10.5
10.2
9.9

1. 65
1.78
1. 85

1. 62
1.72
1.76

.76
. 93
1.26

10.5

1.79

1.75

. 99

.77
1.52
1. 49
.93 ........ .... .. ..
1.24
1.30
1.27

.99

1. 41

1.3~

10.0
9. 7
10. 4

1.46
1.55
1. 25

1.42
1.49
1.24

10.8
11. 5
10.5

2.01
2.19
1.93

1. 99
2.27
1. 88

10.2

1.4J

1.38

11.0

2.05

2.05

= = = == = = = = = = = = = =

' ''i2:a- "'i:il6' ''' i:so' ''' i:04' ''' i:05' '''(.)"'' '''(.)" '' "'ii:2' ·"i:o.3· ""i:Oj- -"i3:9' '--2:03" .... 2:55
9.8
10.0
U.S

1. 90
2.06
1. 57

1. 79
1.95
1.60

1. 28
1.24
.87

1. 25
1.22
.87

1. 32
<I)
1.11

(I)

1.12

1. 29

10.8
10.3
12.0

1.19 · 1.19
10.5
1. 20
1.19
12.4
. 80
.7812.4

2. 42
2.48
1.88

2.34
2.80
2.06

10. 9

1. 80

1.78

1.11

109

1.22

1. 21

11. 1

1.06

2.20

2. 44

- - - - - --------------------------1.05

12.3

• Data n ot used since corresponding data for other kiln run are missing.
, Material from outer portion onl y-t o match kUn run 147.
I. R. ~ Impro vemen t ratio.

Comparisons of runs 147 and 148 (see fig. 10) in modulus of rupture, modulus of elasticity,
and maximum crushing strength are erratic when individual bolts are considered, but 148
averages better than 147 in each of these properties. I n work to maximum load and height of
drop, the results are (contrary to those for small groups from the runs previously considered)
consistent and quite largely in favor of run 147 . This leads to the conclusion that run 148

37

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

damaged the material in work to maximum load and height of drop! as compared t o similar
material tested after drying in run 147.
That the results of run 147 are in all probability entirely satisfactory is concluded from comparison with the groups of air-dried maoorial (fig. 8)2.
Runs 163, 171, and 172.-Runs 171 and 172 compare very favorably with the other runs
and with groups of air-dried material, except in height of drop, where they seem to be quite low.
Run 163 seems to fall below runs 171 and 172, and, in fact, below a number of the
groups of material graphed in figure 8. No definite conclusions concerning these runs can be
drawn until the corresponding air-dried material has been tested.
GENE RAL COMPARISON OF RUNS .

Table 11 affords a means of comparing all runs. It is made up in a manner similar to
Table 5, except that it gives for each run a weighted average improvement ratio instead of a
weighted average" efficiency." "Efficiency" figmes can not, of comse, be obtained in advance
of tests on corresponding air-dried material.
Table 11 indicates practically the same thing as has been brought out previously with
respect to the relative merits of several of the kiln runs. It does not, however, indicate an
appreciable difference between runs 147 and 148. It indicates that 163 is the poorest of all,
and rather distinctly inferior to air-dried material. Very probably Lhe apparently very poor
results on run 163 are only an example of variability explainable through the fact that run 163
was on different material from the other runs. Runs 163, 171, and 172 were made on material
from the same shipment, but 171 and 172 involved other trees than 163. Figmes such as are
given in Table 11 fmnish quite accurate comparisons b etween two or more groups of material
from the same trees. Comparisons between groups of material from different trees must,
however, be modified to take into account the variations which are likely to occur.
TABLE

ll.-Sitka spruce-Average improvement ratios jor all kiln runs and several groups oj air-dTied material.
Air-drr. matching kiln runs
SS and 89.

Air-dry shi pment325.
F I

R

FXR

R

FXR

Kiln run SS.

R

F XR

Kiln run 89.
R

FXR

Air·dry' match·
ing ldln runs
91, 93, and 94.
R

F XR

Kiln run 91.

FXR

I FXR

Kiln run 93.

R

FXR

- - - - - - - 1- :- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -;- - - - - Modulus of rupture.. .
Modulus of elasticity..
Work to maximum
load.................
D rop........ ... .... ...
Maximum crushing
strength ...... . .....
2:R...................
2:R+5=Average R....
2:(FXR).. .. ......... .
2: (F X R) + 2: F =
WeightedaveTllgeR.
Ave. R(kiln dry
Ave. R (air dry)"· .. · ·

2
4

1.81
1.30

3.62
5.20

1.80
1. 18

3.60
4.72

I.SS

1.29

3.76
5.16

1. 78
1.21

3·56
4·84

1.90
1.36

3.80
5.44

1.
1.28

3.76
5.12

1.85
1. 39

3.70
5.56

3
3

11: 51;~

4
3.

¥.!

1.43
1.08

4.39
3.24

1.45
1.12

4.35
3.36

1.42
1.05

4.26
3.15

1.42
1.03

4.26
3.09

1.74 1 5.22
1.21
3·63

1.24
1.11

3.72
3.33

>0

....

2
1.97
3.94
2.37
4.74
2.22
4.44
2.24
4.48
2·37
4.74
2.25 1 4·50
2.61
5.22
R. 08
.. ..
7.78 ........
7.86 . .......
7.96
7.70
8.36 ........
8.20
....
1.56 ...... ..
1.57 •.... ...
1.59 . .. .....
1.54 .. ..... .
1.67 ........
1. 64 ...... .
1.62 ....... .
. . .. ....... . 20.86 ........ 20.59........ 21. 07...... . . 20.29 ..... ... 21.13 ........ 22.23 ........ 21.53
1
. . ..
1.49 .. .. ....
1.47 ..•..•..
1.51 .... .... 1.45
1.52 ........ 1.59 ........ 1.54

---1 - ----------------1 ------····1 ............ ········1········ ········1 ········1
···· ········1
1
1.02

Kiln run 94.

Kiln run 147.

.986 . . .......... .. ..

Kiln run 148.

FXR _ R
_

FXR

, Kiln run 163

_ R
_

1.046 .... .... 1. 013

Kiln run 171.

Kiln run 172.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ I____R_ FXR
F

_ R
_

FXR _R_ FXR _ R_IFXR

Modulusofrupture ... .. ....... . ....... 2
1.94
3.
1.36
5.44
Modulus of elasticity ... ................ 4
Work to maximum load.. ............. 3
1.35
4·05
Drop........... .. ...................... 3
1.27
3. 1
Maximumcrushingstrength ........... 2
2.38
4.76
2:R.. . . .... . . . . ....... . . ....... ........ ....
8.30
2:R+5=AverageR..................... ....
1.66
2:(FXR) ..• ... .. ... : ............................... 21.94
2:(FXR)+2:F= Weighted average R... .... . ..... .. 1.57

1.78
3.56
1.78
3.56
1.82
3.64
1.93
3.86
2.01
4.02
1.07
4.28
1.14
4.56
1.16
4.64
1.30
5.20
1.31
5.24
1.53
4.59
1.45
4.35
1.29
3.87
1.49
4.47
1. 41
4.23
1.36
4.08
1.03
3.09
.97
2.91
.93
2.79
.90
2.70
2.10
4.20
2.42
4.84
].9
3.78
2.27
4.54
2.47
4.82
7. 4
7.82
7.13
8.02
8.10 ...... .
1.57 ........
1.56 ........
1.43 . .. .....
1.60 ....... .
1.62 ...... .
... .... . 20.71 ........ 20.40 ........ 18.4 ........ 20.86 ........ 21.01
1.48 ........
1.46 ...... . .
1.35 ........
1.49 . .......
1.50

!~::~(~~~~ ...................... =~l.OO5 ...... ·.1 .......· ........................................====~
R - Improvement ratio adjusted to 11 per cent moisture.
F- Weighting factor.
I This falling down in tbese properties, while exceUent results were secured in modulus of rupture and manmum crushing strength, is in
accordance with results previously obtained from tests on the effect of other treatments and of inCipient decay. It has been found in such tests
that quire severe damage to sbockresisting ability (as indicated by work and drop values) may occur without any dotectableeffect on statlc strength
as in:licated by modulus of rupture a nd maximum crushing strength.
I It is Dotable that run 148 might be looked upon as fairly satisfactory were it compared to the data oC figure 8, exclusive or run 147.

38

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
PHOTOGRAPHS' 0F FAILURES.

Plates I to IX, inclusive, show failures of impact-bending sticks from various kiln runs
and from some air-dried material. Plates I, II, and I II, pertaining to run 148, are of particular
interest. The possible value and interest of such photographs was not suggested until the
time of the testing of these sticks. It is unfortunate that similar photographs from earlier runs,
particularly 147, are not available.
Of the failures shown in Plate I more than one-third would be judged to be of the highest
type and in no way indicative of the brashness shown by the data of Tables 9 and 10 and figure 10. In Plate II but one or two of the failures are at all indicative of brashness, and it is
difficult to believe that this material has been injured. That such is the case, however, seems
to be very definitely shown by the test results. All but one, or possibly two, of the failures
shown in Plate In are indicative of very poor material.
Plates IV to VII show failures of sticks from runs 171 and 172, and of corresponding green
sticks. Failures of air-dried sticks corresponding to kiln runs 8 and 89 are shown in Plate VIII,
and to runs 91, 93, and 94 in Plate IX. Comparison of these various photographs fails to indicate any difference between the air-dried and kiln-dried material with respect to types of
failure.
Plates I, II, and III as brought out by the comment on them and comparison with the
strength data show that reliable conclusions as to the effec.t of kiln drying can not be attained
by inspection of failures.
RESUME FOR SITKA SPRUCE.

Because of the importan ce of Sitka spruce as an airplane material, and in order to set forth
the methods of analysis used and to illustrate the difficulties met and the caution necessary in
making such an analysis, the data on Sitka spruce have been discussed in greater detail' than is
considered necessary for the other species.
Data concerning 10 kiln runs are presented. These 10 runs include 5 r uns, material
from which is compared to matched material tested after ail drying, and 5 for which data on
matched air-dried material are not available.
It is shown conclusively that Sitka spruce can be kiln dried without loss of strength as compared
to air drying.
In connection with this and other conclusions stated in this report it is desired to call attention to the fact that the material which was kiln dried is compared to material air dried under
conditions probably much more favorable to good results than is ordinarily the case. This
material was also air dried in small sticks (2!- by 2t inches in cross-section). This procedure
is undoubtedly more favorable to the retention of maximum strength than is ail' drying in wider
planks, as is ordinarily done. In fact, casehardening of sticks of this size was purposely
attempted in one kiln run (not discussed herein) but without success.
Data on the first five runs fail to disclose any consistent relation between the temperatures
used in drying and the strength of the resulting material, and taken by themselves would lead
to the conclusion that temperatures up to 180 0 F. can be safely used. There is, however, quite
conclusive evidence of damage to material dried in one of the other runs made with temperatures between 160 0 and 180 0 F. Taken as a whole, therefore, the data presented do not justify
the use of temperatures as high as 160 0 F. Definite evidence as to what is the critical temperature which, should never be exceeded is not afforded.
It is believed, however, that the data presented justify the conclusion that the temperatures of
specification 20500-A (120 0 F. initial to 145 0 F. final) are entirely safe.
There is no evidence of the extreme brashness which has been claimed to result from kiln
drying.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

Because ot the possibility of damage from higher temperature and the fact that as the
scheduled temperature is increased the danger of damage through accidental departure from
schedule increases, it is recommended that the temperatures of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A
(see Appendix A of Report No. 65, " Kiln Drying of Wood for AiI~planes") be not exceeded
in the drying of Sitka spruce for airplane stock.

PLATE I.-FAILURES OF IMPACT-BENDING SPECIMENS, SITKA SPRUCE, KILN RUN 148.

I

PLATE II . -FAILURES OF IMPACT - BENDING SPECIMENS, SITKA SPRUCE , KILN RUN 148.

I

L

PLATE III.-FAILURES OF IMPAC T-B EN DIN3 SPeCIMENS, SITIU SP".CC ,

I(IL~J

RJN 148.

<

'I

'T1

»
r

c
:0

m
(f)

Q
'T1

$
'U

»

(')

-i
OJ

m

z
o
Z

Gl
(f)

'U

m
(')

$

rn
z

(f)

Gl
:0

rn
rn
z

$

»

-i

(')

I
Z

Gl
::-;
r
Z

:0
C
Z

'"

I

1

I

PLATE Y. - FAILURES OF IMPACT -BENDING SPECIMENS, SITKA SPRUCE , KILN RUN 171.

-u
r

»

--l

en

<
0

1

"T1

»
r

c

;u

en

(fl

o

"T1

;;':

-u

»

()

-;-i
OJ

en

z

o

z
G)
(fl

-u

en

()

;;':

en

z

.(fl
(fl

--l

7'

»

(fl

-u
c

;u
()

..rn
G)

;u

en
en

z

;;':

»

--l

()

I
Z
G)

;>;

r

Z

;0

C

Z

...,

'"

~

~

0_ -

__

~"

s

_

••

~~~

_

~

-u
r

»
-i

m

<

I
»

"Tl

r

c

:u

m
(J)

o

"Tl

s:
III

m

z
o
z

G)
(J)

-u

m

o

s:

m

z

(J)
(J)

-i
;>;

»

(J)

-u

:u
c
o

m
;>;

r

z

:u
c
z

...,
N

!

)

PLATE VIII. - FAILURES OF IMPACT-BENDING SPECIMENS, SITKA SPRUCE, AIR-DRIED, MATCHING KILN RUNS
88 AND 89.

.~------- ~- -~-....------"

"U

r

»

--j

rn

><
·1
."

»
r
C

JJ

rn

(f)

o

."

s:

"U

»

()

-;-l
OJ

rn

z

o

z

G)
(f)

"U

<Orn
.- ()
.~s:
rn
»z
Z(f)

o·

(f)

<0-

"'--j
• ;<:

»
(f)

"U

JJ
C
()

rn

»
JJ

o
JJ

rn
o

s:
»
--j

()

I
Z
G)

;<:

r

Z
JJ
C

Z
(f)

EFFECT OF . KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

39

DOUGLAS FIR.
SOURCE OF MA'tERIAL.

J'he material for the four experimenta.l runs on Douglas fir was derived from ] 0 trees
which were grown along the lower Columbia River, in Clatsop County, Oregon, at an elevation
of about 1,500 feet. Each tree was represented by two 8-foot logs, an upper bolt (h-i, i-j, or
m-n) and a lower bolt (a-b), making in all twenty ( -foot bolts. The logs varied in size from
31 inches to 39 inches in diameter and were from 300 to 350 years old. This material constituted shipment 523.
The logs were sawed into 2-inch and 3-inch plank of yarious widths. Specimens for test
in the green and air-dried conditions were obtained from two flitches extending from side to
side and nearly through the center of each -foot log. (See fig. 1 (B).) The sticks from each
8-foot bolt were grouped as outlined 011 page 15.
The remaining material was divided among the four kiln runs. Figure I (B) is an example
showing how planks for test after kiln drying were selected. Figure 1 (D) hows how these
planks were divided into test specimens and how the latter were marked. Table 12 is a
schedule showing the distribution of material from these 10 trees among the four kiln runs.
Previously tested green and air-dried material, with which compari ons are made, was secured
from two trees.from shipment 315, two from hipment 31 , and one from shipment 35-1.
These shipments were from Lewis County, Wash., Lane County., Oreg., and Humboldt County,
Calif., respectively.
TABLE

12.-Douglas fir.

Shipment 523.

List of trees and bolts to show which bolts w(J/'e represented in the various kiln runs.

Tree and bolt.

Kiln run 99. Kiln run 101. Kiln run 102. Kiln run 103.

*
*

la-b ..................... ..
*
li-j ...................... ..
2a-b.......................
~
*
2k-I. ................................................. .
3a-b .......... .. ...................................... .
3m-n .................... ..
*
4a-b ...................... .
*
4h-i. ................................................ ..
Sa-b ................................................. ..
5h-i...... .... .............
5a-b............ ......... ..
6i-J ...... .... ................... ... . ....... ..... ..... ..
7a-b .................................................. .

*

*
*

*
*

7i-J........................

*
*

*
*

*

8a-b ..................... ..
*
8h-i. ... ............................................. ..
9a-b .. .............................................. . ..
9k-I....... ................
*
lOa-b ................................................. ..
10h-i. ................................................. .

*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

* Indicates that material from the bolt listed at the left was included in the kiln run whose number appears at the top of the column .
DESCRIPTION OF KIL ·DRYING CONDITIONS.

Figure 11 is a graphical representation of the kiln conditions and of the moisture contents
of samples of the stock for the four runs 99, 101, 102, and 103.
In every case material went into the kiln soon after cutting from the log and before any
appreciable drying had occurred.
Kiln 1'Un 99.-The charge for run 99 consisted of two hurrclreel twenty-nine 2 by 3 inch, 4
by 5 inch, and 3 by 4 inch pieces. Arrangement of the kiln was practically the same as shown
in figure 7 (kiln run 147), except that the stock was flat-piled with 2 to 3 inches between the
pieces in each layer. Two-inch stickers were used.
Mter a preliminary steaming at 130 0 F. for four hours, drying was started at 120 0 F. and
about 90 per cent relative humidity. Temperature and humidity were gradually changed, as
shown by the curves, to about 125 0 F. and 55 per cent humidity at the end of the run.

40

A "NUAL REPORT NATIO.r AL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

Casehardening, though not apparent at the close of the run, was discovered after removal
of the m aterial from the kiln. It was accor dingly reloaded, steamed for two and one-half
hours at 150 0 F. for the removal of casehardening, and then redri ed.
I nspection showed that less than 1 per cent degrade occurred in this run.
Kiln run 101 .- Run 101 was made in a curtain kiln the arrangement of which is shown
ill figure 12.
The charge consisted of 2-inch and 3-inch material of various widths and derived from
the same bolts as tha t for run 99.
After a preliminary steaming at 120 0 F. drying was begun at 105 0 F. and 80 per oent
relative humidity. These conditions were gradually changed, as ShOVV11 by figure 20, to 120 0
150

~ /40

E.t

iba Ar
?tim e 8 u e

~ 130
Q)

16 0
150

r, .

(3 140
t.i130

~ 110

f- KILN RUN 9 9

80
80

!. f v

100

"

"
.~ .~

~

70
60

U

~

i'I

os Itr

13'5

1:0-

~ 20

, t

ell"

'0

f,

n

0

mpl ..

h( \on

e fo 3 -2f5, f7? Ie

E t

"i 30

~ 20
~ I~

If

KILN

....

t..l 160

~/50

(:)120
110
100
80

'"

Ill:
~

80

l lr

70

(j/40
"-l1
30
(:) 120

"" "
"

RUN
102

60

o

80
70

'B

f

.

A.

/Q

2S m e

012

3

456 7 88

DAYS I N KILN

50

4.i 4 0
~ 30

1"1:-

III
l-

V

K ILN RUN 10 3

90

<:

50
<: 40
~A e

\.or pp ies

.,.

for

~"!e r t.

1
00

"
.'-"

"

30
Q: 20
~ 10

0

22 ~m I s
I 2 3 4 5 6 78910111213141516171818202122232425;:6

110

"

....: .":;:

" 60

~

e

~Iv...

A e t-... e

Ct)no

~

1o.l130

"8

01 ~

oLe:;

180

Iii;

~/40

LL ."

n1!'

JJ;. "
I"" ;;:

F:::

"

!')lC

10
8

IV

4,j 150

"

k

DAYS IN KILN

u

S

!. t,~
HIm t", "f

V

o

ina A r

!>e.

"

...

50

=<:40

0123 45 6788mNQD H I5$ n
DAYS I N KILN

Te

"'<:i

<:i

80
70
"

~

180
180
CJ) 170
'<J 160

V

KILN RUN I I

60

~~

'r

rM~

tV-,

80

.,

SO

~ '~

~n

1i.I110
° 100

L

,,

£ t

~/20

120

~

!l.:

20

IR ;

12u

I

t1

I

;--.
A e

"

eO

6S m I .. 2 n 3

m~f

r

I

10

o

0123456789m"~DUl5ffinmB2O~22 m

DAYS IN K I LN

FlO. H.-Kiln condjtjons for Douglas fir, kiln runs 99, 101, 102, and 103 (shipment 523).

F . and 40 per cent r elative humidity at the end of the run. Steaming at 133 0 F. was used
on the sixteenth day to remove casehar dening.
Less than 1 per cent degr ade occurred, as shown by inspection before and after kiln drying.
Kiln run 102.-The arrangement of the kiln for run 102 was practically as shown in figure
5 (run 89), The stock consisted of 2-inch and 3-inch planks of variou widths. After preliminary steaming at about 165 0 F. the temperature was raised to about 180 0 F., where it was
kept for the remainder of the run. The initial humidity (after steaming) was 80 per cent.
Steaming at 180 0 F . was used once to r emove casehardening.
Kiln run 103.-Figur e 13 shows the kiln arrangement for nm 103. The stock was 2-inch
and 3-inch planks of various widths. After preliminary steaming at 138 0 F . drying was begun
with a temperature of 117 0 F . and relative humidity of 85 per cent. These conditions were
gradually changed to 1420 F. and about 37 per cent relative humidity at the olose of the run.

41

EFFECT OF KILN DRYIN G ON STRE N GT H OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

Y
fi 9'romO';t9 Recor<7//79
ThermoSl'q/
ThermomeTer"
.
-rr
.

'rOA'. Loco/Jon
/' Som~/es ~

If Tf T

II II

"
lf1f1f
If "
rrrr
"
Ir

\ IIINl

II
11

II

II

II

II

""
" IL""
JL
II

I.

/I " If

fI II

II

/I

II

II
/I

II

/I
II

l(flj

,

C:~Tor

II II
'- Inr iI"

-rr

r
;=-O/lS~~ ~
~

//

\ """CO'/lV(M

$reom

JeT

~
,
ri

I,
Ii
"

FIG. 12.-Cross section of kiln and piling diagram, Douglas fir kiln run 101.

o

o

o

/nsfrun?enl"
<-..l

,9'

Inslrt/me/l!

Rack
Wore/,

8o~r/e

Bula fOrPOJ/Vers STeorn

Co// COnTro!

I/alve

Room

S/eO/7? S//roy

Baffle
80ard

FIG. l3.-Cross section kiln and pillng diagram,Douglas fir kiln run 103.

CVr

42

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
THE AIR DRYING.

Test specimens 24. by 2,. inches by 4 feet, matching the various kiln runs, were air dried
for about eight months, from February, 1918, to October, 1918, under practically the same
conditions as similar Sitka spruce specimens (see p. 25), when they were found to have reached
practically constant weight. The average moisture content at time of storing was about 31
per cent. The moisture contents of the samples at the end of the air-drying periods were
about 12 per cent.
STR ENGTH DATA.

Table 13 gives the average mechanical properties of the green and air-dried Douglas fir
previously tested (shipments 315, 318, and 354); and also-by butt and upper bolt classesof material from kiln runs 99 and 101 , and from runs 102 and 103, with green and air-ru'y to
match each pair of kiln runs.
I3.-Average mechanical properties of Douglas .fir.

TABLE

( Tabulations of test results witho'ut moisture ad}ustment. )
Shipment S23.

Various shipments.

Property.

Ship.

Tree.

31S
31S
318
318
3S4

1
6
6

8
3

Lower boits.

to
match
kiln
runs

Air dry ,
to
match
kiln
runs

99

99

Green,

and
Green.

Air dry.

99.

Jilin

run

101.

102

and

101.

Kiln
run

Green,
to
match
kiln
runs

101.

and
103.

Air dry,
to
match
kiln
runs
102

Kiln
run
102.

Kiln

run
103.

and
103.

- - - - - -- - - - - - -:1---.1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - STATIC BEND1NG.

39.8
MOisture (per cent)' ...........
.467
Specific gravity' .. . .....................
Fiber stress at elastic limit (lbs. per sq.
in.) ............ .. .................. .. .
7,825
S,loo
Modulus of rupture (IbS.!iOO sq . in .) ... ...
Modulus of elasticity (1,
lbs. per sq.
in.) ...................................
1, 684
Work to elastic limit (inch·lbs . per cu.
in.) .. ........................... .... ... ... . . . ....
Work to maximum load (inch·lbs. per
cu. in.) . ....... ........................
6.6

6. 4
.52G

36.9
.465

12.0
. 494

11.0
.SOO

11.5
.518

33.7
.4Sa

12.2
.484

13.3
.501

9.1
.487

1l,437
15, 2<1~

4,810
7,860

8,S40
12, S10

9,720
13,3OU

9,491
3,6091

4,910
7,980

8,280
12,270

8,072
11, lOS

1O,4S0
13,550

2,184

1,550

1,859

1,922

2,039

1,535

1,791

1,842

1,704

.87

2.21

2.73

2.53

.91

2.16

2.0

3.79

9.1

8.2

9.5

10.4

9.9

8.2

9.1

7. 7

9.0

. . ...... . .

Iill'ACT B ENDING: 50·POUND HAMMER.

MOisture (per cent) , ................... ..
Specific gravity ..........................
Fiber stress at elastic limit (Ibs. per sq.

41. 4
.463

6.4
.528

33.5
.490

12.1
.499

10.8
.498

11.5
.517

33.1
.455

12.2
. 480

12.3
.499

9.6
.489

in.) . . ........... .. ........... . .........

10,103

15,605

10, 140

13, 730

12,387

13,930

9,120

13,350

13,122

13,050

1,817

2,371

1,788

2,100

2,158

2,503

1,547

1,987

2,327

2,250

3.2
23.9

6. 1
34. ~

3.2

3.9

4.

~

24

5.0
28. 2

27.4

29.0

!3.0
22.0

5. 0
28.1

4. 2
25.0

30.4

Moisture (per cent) I .. .......... . . . ......

37.9
. 459

6.4
.504

33.5
455

12.3
.491

10.9
.497

11. 7
. S14

32.5
. 451

11.9
.482

10.9
. 498

8.8
.483

sq. in.) ......... .... ................. ..

4,060

11,233

3,850

7,5·10

7,921

8,250

3,850

7,320

7,220

8,640

Modulus of elasticity (1,000 lbs. per sq.
n.) ...... . . . .......... .. ..... . .........
Work to elastic limit (inch·lbs. per cu .
in.) .. .. . ............. . ........ . ........
Drop causing complete failure (inches) ...

41.

COMPRESSiON PARALLEL TO GRAIN.

~~f!~~a~~tJ'skig 'strength" iibs.' 'pe~'
I

Per cent moisturo based on oven·dry weigbt.

' Specific gravity based on oven·dry weight nnd volume 8S tested.

43

EFFECT OF KILN :CR:YING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.
TABLE

l3.-Average mechanical properties oj Dov.glall fir-Continued.
Shipment 523.
Upper bolts.

Property.

runs

Air dry,
to
match
kiln
runs

99
and

and
10l.

Air dry,
to
match
kjln
runs

and
103.

Green,

to
match
k'iln

101.

99

Green,

IGln
run
99.

to
match
k'iln
runs

Kiln
run
101.

102

Kiln
run

102

Kiln
run

102.

103.

and
103.

- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

STATIC BENDlNO:

Moisture (per cent) I ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ... . . .
Specific gravity· .......... . .... .. ........................... .
Fiber stress at elastic limit (lbs. per sq. in.) .... . .. ........... .
Modulus of ruptw-e (lbs. per sq. in.) .... ... ... ............... .
Modulus of elasticity (1,000 lbs. per sq. in.) . ... ...... .. ....... .
Work to elastIC hllllt (mch-Ibs. per cu .ln.)... _. .... ... .. ..... . .
Work to maximum load (mch-Ibs. per cu. In.) .. . ......... ... .

10. 4
.433
8,811

30.3
.411
4,320
7,070
1, 421
.76
6.6

12.3
. l52
7,590
11,3 0
1,738
1. 87
8. 6

n,563

31.1
.407
9,560
1,713
3.0
20.0

12.0
.435
11, 880
1,796
4. 4
22.7

10. 4
. 429
11,814
2,012
3.9
23.9

29.9
.409
3,630

12. 1
.440
6,810

9.8
.432
7,358

1,697
2.59
8.6

10.9
.436
8,917
H, 860
1,768
2.55
8.2

29.4
.435
4,880
7,560
1,522
.91
6.8

11. 7
.474
7,930
11,820
1,761
2.03
8.6

12.4
.476
7,544
10,520
1,765
1.84
7.5

9.3
.480
9,510
12,562

30.1
.432
'2.9
19.0

11. 9
.481
13,260
1,986
5.0
26.2

11. 2
.479
12, 970
2,243
4.2
23.0

9.1
.483
12,730
2,282
4.0
28.1

30.9
.432
3,900

11. 9
.475
7, 230

9.9
.472
7,440

8.8
.4 1
8,740

13~~
7.9

IMPACT BENDINO: 50-POUND HAMMER.

r;~~r~~~~t~e~~~

:..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .'.. . . .:'.'.::'.:'.'.::::
.

Fiber stress at elastic limit Obs. per sq. In.) . ........... .. .. ..
Modulus of el,:stl.cit1. ( 1,000 \bs. per sq. in.) . ................ ..
Work to elastiC limIt (mch-lbs. per cu. m .) .................. .
Drop causlug complete failure (inches). .......... ... . . ... _. . . .

10.5
.435
12,520
2,135
4.2
24. 0

~,~

COMPRESSION PARALLEL TO GRAIN.

Moisture (per cent) I .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

~~l!';,\£ac~~,1}ng's'treiigth'(lbS" pec'sq: iDT::::::::::: :::::
1

Per cent mOisture based on oven-dry weight.

11.0
.432
7,496

, Specific gravity based on oven·dry weight and volumc as tested.

Table 14 presents the average improvement ratios for the more important properties of
the various groups of air-dried aud kiln-dried material. These ratios are derived from Table 13
and are given both with and without adj ustment to a uniform moisture content (11 per cent).
TABLE

l4.-Average improvement ratios of Douglas fir (with and without adJustment to

11

per cent 7TWisture).

[Shipment 523.]
Static bending.

Seasoning.

Modulus of
rupture.

Bolt.
Moisture.

1. R .

1. R.

Modulus of
elasticity.
1. R.

1. R.

Impact bending.

Work to
maximum load.
1. R.

1. R.

Compression parallel
to grain.
Maximum
crushing
strength.

Height of
maximum drop.
Moisture.

adadadas
as
as
tested. justed. tested . justed. tested . lusted.

1. R.

1. R.

Moisture.

adas
tested. lusted.

1. R.
I. R.
as
adtested. lusted.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --- - - - - - - - - - --- - - - - -P. ct.
Air dry to match kiln runs
12.0
99 and 101. .. .. .......... a- b ....
11.0
Kilnmn99 .... .. .......... a-b ....
11.5
Kiln run 101. .............. a-b ....

1.59
1. 70
1.74

1. 66
1.70
1.79

1.20
1.24
1.32

1.22
1.24
1. 33

1.16
1.27
1.21

1.17
1.27
1.22

Air dry to match kiln runs
102 and 103 .............. a-b ....
Kiln run 102 ............... a-b .. ..
Kiln run 103 ...•........ _... a-b ....

12.2
13.3
9.1

1.54
1.39
1.10

1. 61
1.51
1·58

1.17
1.20
1. 11

1.19
1.25
1.09

1.11
.94
1.10

P.et.

12.1
10.8
11.5

1. 18
1.14
1.21

1.20
1.14
1. 22

1.12
.93
1.09

12.2
12.3
9.6

1.28
1.14
1.38

P. ct.

12.3
10.9
11.7

1.96
2. 06
2.14

2.13
2.05
2.25

1.34

1. 31
1.15

H.9
10.9
8.8

1.90
1.88
2.24

2.00
1.87
1.98

Air dry I...... ............. Upper.

6.4

1.95

1.62

1.30

1.21

1.38

1.26

6. 4

1.46

1.32

6.4

2.77

2.08

Air dry to match kiln runs
99 and 1Ol. .............. ... do .. .
Kiln run 99 ... .. ........... ... do .. .
Kiln run 101. .............. ... do ...

12.3
10.4
10.9

1. 61
1.64

1.71
1.60
1.67

1.22
1.19
1.25

1·25
1.18
1.24

1.30
1. 30
1.24

1. 35
1.29
1.24

12.0
10.4
10.5

1. 14
1.20
1.20

1. 15
1.19
1.19

12.1
9.8
11.0

1.~

1. 68

2.03
2.06

2.00
1.90
2. 06

Air dry to mateh kiln runs
IOJ and 102 ........ .... .. ... do ...
Kiln run 102 ............... ... do .. .
Kiln run 103 ............... ... do ...

11.7
12.4
9.3

1.56
1.39
1.66

1.61
1.45
1.56

1.16
1. 16
1.07

1.17
1.18
1.06

1.27
1.10
1. 16

1.28
1. 12
1.14

11.9
11.2
9. 1

1.38
1. 21
1.48

1.42
1.21
1.40

11.9
9.9
8.8

1.85
1.91
2.24

1.95
1.81
1.9

1 Average of 5 trees of previously tested air-dried material, contained in the (c-d), (d-e), and (0-1) bolts, shipments 315, 318, and 354.
1. R.=lmprovcment ratio.

The improvement ratios from Table 13 are graphed in figure 14.

44

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVI SORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

COMPRESSION

STATIC

IMPA C T

BE NDING

BENDING

~---------------------,
/r---------------------~
MOD. OF RUPTURE

MOD. OF ELASTICITY

PARALLEL

.~.
r.- - - ~

WORK TO MAX L OAD

HEIGHT

or DROP

20 ____________________________________
1.8 __________________________________________________

~

(1 1.6

'-J

I:: / 4 ~

~ ~ /Z

~

~

~~

~

11
1j

Q:: ~.8 ~

~~6 ~
&~ " ~
::::>
z ~

"
~

'"
"

e

, '"
"'''

",'-

~ 11
'"

~

"
:::
,'"

e
""

.

f--f---

~

~~
"'''

~

'"
'"

. ~

~

"

~

'"
'"

I!

e
~~

r-

1j

~
~

~ ~ g

~~

~
~

,"
'
~

~~
"'''

~

.

,~

~~

.

""

e

~
0;

~

I

~

..
~

I:
~

8:

~ I ~ 1!

~~

~~

...---

~

e

~.~

I

I--

I

t--

I

I

f---'
t--r-r-f---

~

Ie

1j

~

ll:

~

~

~~

~~

I

I

.
r--

~

~.~

~ I!
"

,

'"

~ i
f1

e

,q

I

1:

~

~

~

~

'"
'"

I
, :-->-r
,

I

~ I- .----a
..
'

~

H

~i

I
I
I

~

~~

~.~

"'
~ I!

:

~
,.

~

~

e

I
I

·
·
·

t-- ~

11

~

~

~
,

.

i
I

r.:- i

~

t-- ri'
1j

<!

~

~

~

~

~r-

.~

~

~~

<t '

",'-

I

.,
8: ~ ~ I? I! ~
e
e
~

~

I

~

8:

~

~

e

I

I

~

~ ~

~

..
1\

">

I

I

t-- r--

~

·

I

!--r--

~
E1

~

""

,
...---

&:

~~

I
I
I
I

I

...
11

~

">

~~

~

~

~

e

I
I

.
..
1:
....

8:

',
"
"
:::

~

I
I
I
I
I

I

~

.I?
..
.....

I

!! ~ ~

""

I

I

~

~~

"" ""
I
I
I

~

II

",'-

, '<

I

lZ
~

~
~

r-

S!

~

~

~

~

.

~

I
I
I
I
I
0-

8:

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

1j

r-

~ t-

r-- ~

11

1j

8:

I

I

...---

...---r--

~

...--~

i=

~

~ /.0

I-

MAX CR. STR£NGTH

r-

~------------

r-- ...---

~

'<<:>

~

~ ~

e

~~

~

~

Q

~
~ g

~~

""

..

~

li!

.,

~

ll:

'~"

f

, ~
~

'"
'"

k\

~

~

~
~

11

e

~~

:;~

~

h

e

~

~~

""

FIG. 14.-Jmproyemont ratios lor comparison Ol kUn-dried and ai r·dried stock, Douglas fir.

Table 15, similar to Tables 6, 7, and 8 for Sitka spruce, give efficiencies for upper and lower
bolts, respectively .
TABLE

15.--Effici,mciu for kiln runs on Douglas fir.
(A)-U PPER BOLTS.
Kiln run 101.

Kiln run 99.
Proper ty.

Kiln run 102.

F.

____________________________________.1 ___ . __ ~ ___
_
E_
E_._

Per cen!.

~~~~~ g~P~lfci~y:::::::::: : ::::::::::::: :: : :: :::: :::: ~
i

Work to maximum load. ..... . . . . . . . .. . . ... .. .. .. .. .....

3

~~:g

88. 9

~~ie~~~:~;~i~~~~~ ~~~~~~~:~:.:. ~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~~~~ ~~~~~ ~ ~ ::~: : : ~~~~:

Percent.
IS7.2
374.4
266.7
31O.S
190.0
1, 329. 1
94.9

97.4

~n

103.6
103.0

EXF.
194.S
396.S
275.4
310.S
206.0

___ .. _
E_

Percent.

Kiln run 103.

I

~ ___ . __ ~
E_

89.4
100.9
89.0
86. 6 \
93.4

1,3~U

\

17S.8
403.6
267.0
259.S
IS6.S
1,296. 0
92.6

Percent.

97.0
90.6
90 . 6
9 .5
97.9

194.0
362.4
271. 8
295 . 5
195. 8
1,319.5
94.2

98.6
91.5
97 .3

197.2
366.0
291 . 9

(B)-LOWER BOLTS.
Modulus 01 rupture. .... . ... ..... . ...... .. . . ... ..........
Modulusor elasticity . . ..... .. .. . ... .... .. .. ......... .. ...
Worktomaximumloe.d .. ... . .. .. .. .... . .... . ...........

2
4
3

102.4
101. 7
10S.7

~f~~~i~~::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: J .....~:~.

107.2
109.0
105.2

214 .4
436.0
315.6

93.7
104.2
83.0

187.4
416.8
249.0

I,HH ~~U J~J gn J~J ~:~ I.m:~

= ---ru==
==

~(EXF)+~F- W elghted average E . . . . . .... . .................. "' . . ' "
Ayerage 01 upper and lower bolts . . . ...... .. ..... . .

204.S
406. S
326. 1

100.7

106.0

1ii2.4

93 ·1

96.0

==-----g;s ==1-05.1

J!' ~ Weigh tlng lactor
.
Improvement ratio for property 01 kiln dry
E=E1liCiencY- Improvement ratio for same p roperty 01 corres ponding air dry

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

45

DISCUSSION.

Inspection of figure 14 indicates that of the four kiln runs, 101 alone has given results
which can be considered fully equal to air drying. This run falls below the corresponding
air-dried material in three instances: Modulus of rupture, modulus of elasticity, and work to
maximum load, all for material from upper bolts. The deficiencies in these instances are so
small that they are entirely offset by superior excellence in other respects.
Further inspection shows that run 102 is very consistently, modulus of elasticity being the
only exception, inferior to the corresponding air-dry, and is, upon the whole, the poorest of
the four runs. These conclusions are supported by the figures presented in Table 15. Air
drying is taken as the standard of efficiency, or 100 per cent. The efficiencies of air drying
and of the several kiln runs, the latter as obtained by averaging the figures of Table 15 (A)
with those of Table 15 (B), are as follows:
Per cent.

Air drying .............. _. _. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 100. 0
Kiln run 101 ...................... .. .................................. " 102. 4

Kiln run 99 .. ___ . _.. _.. _.. _______ ......... _.... ___ . ___ ..... _. . . . . . . . . . . . 97. 8
Kiln run 103 .... _... _.. _........ __ .. . .. . _... .... _.... __ . _... ___ ........ __ 95.1
Kiln run 102 ... __ ... _. _. _... __ ... _. _.... _.... _. _. .. _....... _ ... _. _. _. _. _ 92. 7

Reference to figure 11 shows that the above list is in order of increasing temperatures; i. e.,
as temperature increases, efficiency decreases.
If the values for efficiency with respect to work to maximum load and maximum drop
only, as given in Table 15 (A) and (B), be averaged (without weighting) we getPer cent.

Air drying ...... _.. __ . .. . . .... _......... __ . _.... _. _....... _. _....... __ . .. 100. 0
Kiln run 101. _... _. ... _..... _........ _... _........... __ .. _. _...... _. _... 100.6
Kiln run 99 __ . _.. _.. _... __ . _.. _...... .. .... _... _............ _.... _... ___ 98. 6
Kiln run 103 ................................ .. ............. _. . ... ....... _ 95.8
Kiln run 102 ................ _....... _. _... _..... _. _.. ... .... _.. .. . _. _.... 86.6

The order is as before, and the deficiency is less in runs 99 and 103, but somewhat greater
in run 102.
These figures all point to a rather definite relation between strength properties and the
tempern.tures used in drying. In no case is the deficiency sufficient to be considered an obstacle
to the use of such material for ordinary purposes. However, any failure to equal air-dried
material must be looked upon with considerable suspicion when stock is to be used for aircraft
construction.
Tests of the effect of various steps of pTeservative treatment on Douglas fir have shown
that this species is especially susceptible to injury by high temperatures. Data on such tests,
together with those given herein, furnish the following for correlation of temperature and
strength:
Temperature.'
DelJTeti F .
110

120
130

180

200
259

Reference.

Modulus of rupture.'

Per cent.

Kiln run 101 ..•..... ..

102.3

Kiln run 99 .......... .

Kiln run 103 . .. ...... .
Kiln run 102 ... .... . . .
Bull. No. 286 ' ....... .
Bull. No. 286 ' . .•. . ...

98.0
97.8

90.5
• 89. 0
• 78.3

• 93. 5
• 91. 7

, 91. 2
85. 0

1

, 'l'his is the temperature applied to green wood.
In percentages of control materia!.
U. S. Department of Agriculture Bull. No. 286: Strength Tests of Structural Timbers Treated by Commercial Wood Preserving P rocesses.
(Table 3-Creosoted at atmospheric pressure and 200 OF. for 27 hours.)
• Bull. No. 286: Steamed at ZO-pound pressure for five hours.
• Bull. No. 286: Results from specimens treated green and tested soon alter treatment.
• Bull. No. 286: Results (rom tests made after thorough air drying (oUowlng treatment.
, Results of 5 and 6 averaged.
S
I

These data are plotted in figure 15. While the tests of Bulletin No. 286 are probably
not exactly comparable to those described herein, they furnish basis for an estimate of the
effect of still higher temperatures than those used in the kiln runs herein discussed.

46

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

The data on the four kiln runs as given in Table 1.5 (A) and (B) and as presented in figure] 5
indjcate that 120 0 F. is about the critical temperature for Douglas fir in th e green state. The
data drawn from Bulletin No. 286 by showing a continual decrease of strength properties with
increase in temperature support this indication.
CONCLUSIONS.

In view of the points brought out in the above discussion these conclusions are reached:
(1) There is a quite definite relation between the strength properties of Douglas fir and the

temperatures used in drying it. (2 ) About 120 0 F. is the critical temperature above which
damage is likely to result. (3) The decrease of strength properties with increase in temperature
is gradual. (4) The maximum damage to be expected from the use of Table 1 of Specification
.....

;;:
::.:
/0.

~

<:5

~

t:I:
~

.n

"<

S;
I~

~

<;b

!>
~

I~

10 tll IG lA E; IFIR
8~

k'E .A be iN

· 0

Is rR. ':A ~G rH IPR bf !.-:f

IL

Tl.S

AlVL:

7iD

o M.

xl/-'V! 19 '(7t

litAl. IPi fR147 lUI- fF

~ pp, L
n

o n

lltt aRt to

+

IW 90b

~( r~ 1/,

/SO

iWl rk

IF. ~r.'
lie btE Id Ito

pf' c, n Ira

u::'rffi

Iof' In

.ri.

d

>f.

Of ~r pq,

t' J; o e.

·c .rIB/ yhf

fol N. )Ox IL 0,

fl

S

0

-7

Irn
10/ ~eo

~p ~c

V,zJat
.

~

1'n

r,~

'n

~h

-P,

:

VI: .....

n ;.)

'h I+.

u. .ll A IB III '2 ,~6 To I e 3 Sw, In e s t (,,, d
Iso n Glrt; r 1: ec: In ef ! qI ~ ~ ~ if'Yi h s e i >f'T r th pro
13 te
id vi ~q £<. I/, wi ~q tr. at
m n
- Vn~ n A ,/ ~, in er..s re.p! Ia' wfii~ rele.n
(l) Cr eo at t 'pll Q 2 ?O 'FO!-, ~ 1r.?OJ oh ri l- re. sdre to
'27 '(iT. .(31S~ a r>e 1 £ t IV!.~. P!, :is u e Ira ~h
~.

10

I 0

l'i<J

hi;o

Temperature

/(.0

2( DO

2.?O

;l.0

ApplIed to Green Wood - De9rees

2,50

r

FIG. IS.-Relation between strength properties of Douglas fir and temperattlle applied t o the green wood.

20500-A does not exceed 5 pel' cent. In all probability the susceptibility to damage by heat
decreases as the moisture content decreases, so that even this damage is not really to be expected.
(5) When maximum safety is desired, as for aircraft material, it seems doubtful if the temperature of 120 0 F. should be exceeded before the material is reasonably dry. (6) It is to be
expected that Table 2 of Specification 20500-A will produce material fully equal to that air dried.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

It is recommended that the temperature of Table 2 of Specification 20500-A should not be
exceeded in drying Douglas fir for maximum strength value. Humidities used should be such
as to keep checking and casehardening to a minimum. Steaming as permit ted by Specification
20500-A would be expected to have no harmful effect.

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

47

WESTERN WHITE PINE.
SOURCE OF M ATERIAL.

Four experimental kiln r uns have been made on material from two shipments of logs.
Shipment 488, which furnished stock for kiln runs 95 and 110, consisted of logs from 24 trees
cut in I daho. These logs were 10 to 20 inches in diameter and too knotty to be considered of
airplane grade. Test specimens were, however, so selected as to be unaffected by the defects
and were representative of the clear wood.
Shipment 570 furnished stock for kiln runs 149 and 150. This shipment consisted of
seventeen 16-foot butt logs sent to the Laboratory from Keeler, Idaho. These were of better
quality than the previous shipment and were 18 to 36 inches in diameter.
Data on these two shipments are compared with data from green and air-dried material
from one log of shipment 224. This shipment came from Missoula County, Mont., and was
tested prior to the beginning of the present series of tests.
CUTTING OF STOCK.

The logs of shipment 488 were cut into 8-foot bolts, which were subdivided similarly
to the logs of commercial white ash. (See fig. 10.) The resulting planks were cut into 2 by
3 inch, 2 by 4 inch, 2 by 5 inch, and 3 by 4 inch stock.
Table 16 shows how the material was divided for drying in two kiln runs.
The 16-foot logs of hipment 570 were sawed in a manner imilar to that shown for Douglas
fir in figure 1 (B). Material for test green and after air drying was derived from a 2t-inch
flitch extending through the center of each log. Half of the remaining material from each log
was dried in the form of 2t-inch planks, of various widths and 16 feet long.
DESCRIPTION OF Kll..N DRYING CONDITIONS.

Figure 16 shows graphically the kiln conditions and the moisture content of samples of
stock for the four runs 95, 110, 149, and 150.
Run 95.-The charge consisted of 2 by 3 inch, 2 by 4 inch, 2 by 5 inch, and 3 by 4 inch
pieces derived from shipment 4 8. (See Table 16.) The arrangement of the kiln was much
as for run 147 of Sitka spruce ( ee fig. 7), except that the material was flat piled. The piling
was open (2-inch stickers and 2! to 3 inches between the pieces in the layers), with the 2-inch
stock on top of the 3-inch.
TABLE

16.- Western white pine- Shipment 488-List of trees and bolts to show which bolts were represented in each kiln run.
Tree and
bolt.

Kiln run
95.

Kiln run
110.

la-b.•.... , ........ .
2a-b.....
•

*

2c-d ... . .•...•. ... ..
3s-b.....•..........
4 a-b....
*

•

4c-d .....•..........

5a-b ..... ... , ...... .
6 a-b......
•
6c-d ........ , •.•....
7a-b ............... .
8a-b._._
*
8c-d .......... . .... .

9a-b . . ............. .
IOa-b_. _.

*

*
*

•
•

•

•

1Oc-d ............... .
11 a-b ............... .
12 a-b....
•
l2c-d .......•........

*
*
*

I

Tree snd
bolt.

Kiln run
95.

13 a-b ................ .

*

14 a-b.....
14 c-d ......••... , .. •..

15a-b ................ .
16 a-b.....
*
16c-d ..... .. ......... .
17a-b ................ .
18a-b.....
*
18 c-d •...............•

19a-b......... ... .... .
20 a-b.....
*
20 c-d ....•..•...••...•
21 a-b ................ .
22 a-b. ....
•
22c-d ..•.•..•..•••.•••
23a-b ..•.•.....•.•....
24a-b... ..
24 c-d •.•.•...•.•.•.•.•

Kiln run
110.

*

•
*

•
*

*

•
•
*

*

*

• Indicates that material from the bolt listed at the left was represented in tbe kiln run whose number appears at the top 01 the column.
Material was taken Irom each bolt tor tests in I:reen and air-dried condition.

48

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVI SORY COMM ITTEE F OR AERON AUTICS.

The run was begun with 41 hours' preliminary steaming at 90 0 t o 135 0 F. Temperatures
and humidities were as shown in figure 16. The irregularities in these factors during the first
few days were due to derangement of controlling apparatus. As shown by the curves of figure
16, the samples of 2-inch stock reached a satisfact ory dryness and it was removed from the
kiln three days ahead of the 3-inch stock.
Consid.erable troubl e was experienced from lack of uniformity in drying. This was largely
due to wide variations in the initial moisture content of different pieces and to apparently
nonuniform distribution of moisture lenthwise of individual pieces.
, -_.
KILN RUN 95

K IL N RUN //0

2 tn.& 31i?MATERIAL

Zm d Jin. MA TEI?IAL

160
ISO

~/JO
~/20 ~ I I

",I'-f)

I

4,j

130
t..:j11O

~/C<l

~/"" UI

l(j 90

lo:J lI?

C)

<:) 80

M
"0 1 '\
70

Vh ~ lr:'t

l\

\~
<,,0 I~ ~
"

~

I".

/'tUMIOITY

70
60

~:
U

60
SO

'lJ

~: !P I '"

'~ ~ ~

~ "" I.... ~

"1 20
Il: 10

:J~:rure

v,

F::S~-r

JO

''""

~ /20

TeMPeRATURe

I

//0

"

.;,

I ~ ;-;,;

o
Z 40

6

~

JO Confenr

CI:

",0/
10 2m. Samples

0.." I'e

W 'k,-

I"-

t--,..... I-

t- t-'~,

~.9'

F

-',k ·

30

n rL: f""

170

~,.,

'"

"

6

8

1\

'"

""' ~ ~'"

20
10

'" f'.. I--

'.,..

~79.

I.

I' " F<'<~ .

e

m.MM._a. aM .U ~

OA YS

K ILN R UN 150

- I
2,n kMTFR.'AL_

2m MATERIA

IT
II" )

rcY""

H

~h

j-.

180

170

:--..Il~

I-'

1M

• ~Dt.

'--

KILN RUN 149
140

"- k"-:;: in.

IV

~~ E' -'

2

~p

'"

II

o

C IOI21.t.161(J
l>fYS

~R,

:---

160

I..; If0

It.:1~

~ 1'0

Ci)140

I<.J 130

I_I-

V

~

~/10

"" 130
120

'" 110

~/OO

(!) /10

100
90

'10 ~
"
60

" SO
~

~
I;i

40
,]0

20

« 10
o

--

"~< "
I, "- "'-

90

"\

'f),ln

HI

J

80

~

\

10

:i
~.

\

/\.

IV

V

"-

TUI':> ·U(r't.

- .f-!- vr. 01 I':>"r,c "s
~~ Ii'.:'
-- - r::- ,--.. 1-;.-.;:: ~_ .i:
:

--

-~

--

--

"-

IUITIL

~

,,60 bJ~

I-

-

Z66cmaM.~.aMaMMU.~M~~~~"50

DA YS

k

:<
'<J

SO

40

~~
~

~~ ~~
~~

"'
""''' ' '

1('.

r-f..-..
IS

F

h.ID'

10

o

F E:
2 6

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 a? 2P Zt, P6 i'B .JO .J2
OArS

.u. ,]6

F IG . l 6.- Kiln conditions for western white pine, kiln runs 9S and 110 (shipm ent 488) and 149 and 150 (shipment 570).

Some slight evidence of casehardening was found near the end of the run. It was not
sufficient, however, to necessitate steaming.
Run 110.-The charge for this run, as for 95, was of 2 by 3 inch , 2 by 4 inch, 2 by 5
inch, and 3 by 4 inch pieces derived from shipment 488 (see Table 16). Arrangement of the
kiln and piling of stock was quite similar to run 95. Spaces between pieces in the layers were,
however, only one-half to three-fourths of an inch .
After preliminary st~aming at 135 0 F. for 18 hours, drying conditions were established
and continued as shown by figure 16. As in r un 95, considerable trouble was experienced
because of nonuniformity of moisture distribution in the charge. This cond.ition obtained both
at the beginning and at the end of the run. The closer piling was perhaps in part responsible
for the longer drying period than in run 95. F urthermore, because of the very high moisture

49

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRE GTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

content of one sample, raising of temperature and lowering of humidity were delayed longer
than in run 95.
Run 149.- The charge consisted of 3 by 3 inch, 3 by 5 inch, and 3 by 8 inch pieces, 16 feet
in length, derived from shipment 570. Material wa flat piled on It-inch stickers with 2-inch
spaces.
The very long time required for this run is due largel y to the fact that it was made in an
experimental kiln in which a fan circulatory system had been devi ed and which had not yet
been rendered controllable. Circulation was very poor and r esulted in nonuniformity of temperature between different parts of the kiln. Slight ca eharci.ening was relieved by stpaming for
one hour at 1 50 F. on the thirtieth day. No caschardening was evident at the close of the run.
Run 150.- The charge consisted of 3 by 3 inch, 3 by 4 inch, and 3 by 5 inch pieces, 16 feet
in Jength and of various widths, derived from shipment 570. The material was close-piled on
a slant, with It-inch stickers. Material was steamed for one hour on two occasions at 180 0
and 174 0 F., respectively, to relieve casehardening. Slight casehardeningwas present when the
material was removed from the kiln.
Am DRYING .

Material was stored for air drying under conditions similar to those for Sitka spruce and
Douglas fir, as previously described.
STRENGTH DATA.

Table 17 gives the complete data available after the te ting of the air-dried material
Improvemen t ratios derived from this table are shown in Table 1 and graphed in figure 17.
TABLE

l7 .-Average mechanical te8t val ue8 oj western white pine-( Tabulations
content).

I

Shipment 224.
Property.

08

te8ted-No adjustment

Shipment 4

I Groen, AUdry,
to
i to
Green . Au' dry. ' match m atch
kiln run kilnrWl

95.

95.

11.6
.397
6,360
9,420
1,486
1.5

moisture

Shipment 570.

Green, Ajrdry,

Kiln
run
95.

JOT

to
to
match match
kilnrwl kiln run

Green,

Kiln
run
110.

110.

110.

6,610
10,000
1,512
1.6

51.3
.372
3,600
5,410
1, \12
0.7

12.0
8.0
.400
.403
6,270
,500
9,200 11,330
1,471 I 1,7l9
1.5
2.4

Kiln
run
149.

to
match
kiln run
149.

Green,

to
Kiln
match run
kiln run 150.
150.

- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - STATI C BENDING.

Moisture (per cent)l ...................... .
~eciJiC gravity' ........... ...... .........
lberstressat elastic limit (lbs. per sq. In.) ..
Modulus of rupture (Ibs. per sq. In.) .. .....
Modulus of elasticity (1,000 Ibs. per sq. in.) . .
Work to elastic limit (inch·lbs. per Cll.In.) ..
Work to maximum load (lnch·lbs. per
Cll.In.)" ................................

47.9
.405
3,961
6,147
1,210
.73

12,938
1,356
2.9

65.9
.360
3,400
5,130
1,132
6.2

5.5

10.7

4.6

7.9

7.5

5.2

7.6

46.1
.382
7,2!8
1,221

.3
15.402

64.5
.362
7,650
1,364
2.5
25.0 . 17.4

11.1
.385

1,756
4.6
19.6

59.4
.366
7,150
1,324
2.2
16. 4

11 :~

11,900

11~~
.379
12,160
1,860
4.5
20.3

11,250
1 ,67~

55.0
.360
2,540

11.7
.389
5,120

12.0
.379
5,630

02.1
.362
2,470

.0

.414

,40~

11.0

·388

46.4
.347
3,280
5,160
1,169
.6

7.9
.390
i,560
li, 48O
1,623
2.2

45.7
.345
3,240
5,100
1,149
5.3

.5
.3
7,310
10,600
1,523
2. 0

7.7

5.4

9.3

5.3

9.2

45. 5
.361
7,980
1,403
2.6
17.6

7.7

45.6

10. 5

4.2
21.3

9.9
.399
12,730
2,099
4.3
24.0

11,640
1,765
4. 3
25.6

7,930
1,402
2.6

\i.6

11,120
1,701
4. 0
23.9

12. 1
9
5,190

6.6
.394
7,690

47.1
.350
2,390

7:~
.385
5,750

47.1
.350
2,390

.2
.382
6,000

1

IMPACT BENDING, 5Q.POIn1D IlAMMER.

¥oisture (per c~nt)I . ............ . .........
S,(lecific gravity· ...........................
Fiber stress at elastic li®t (Ibs. per sq. in.) ..
ModulllS of elasticity (1,000 Ibs. per sq. In.) ..
Work toelasticlimit (Illcb·lbs. Oer cu. in.) ..
Drop causing complete failure Inches) .....

I

17.0

. ~:~~. I

.2
.393
3,070

7.91
7.432
,840

.396

.358

.383

.388

COM PRESSION PARALLEL TO GRAIN.

Moisture (per cent) I.......................

~~~~~~;;~ig streiigth (ib~:per ~ci. ·ifl·.j

I Per cent moisture based on oven·dry weight.

I

I

1

• Specific grav ity based on oven·dry weight and ,·olum. as tested.

50

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVI SORY OOMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTIOS.

TABLE

l8.-Average improvement ratios of western white pine.-( W ith and without adJustment to 9 per cent moisture).
Impact bending,
50-pound ha=er.

Static bending.

Ship·
ment.

Modulus of
rupture.

Seasoning.

Modulus of
elasticity .

Work to maximum load.
Moisture.

I . R.ns 1. Rad- I. R. as I. R.ad- I . R .as 1. R.adtested. justed. t ested. justed. tested. lusted.

PCTCt.
Air-dry._ ........... . ...
8.0

--- - - - - - -

~--

Maximum
crushing
strength.

Height of maxi·
mum drop .

Moisture.

~--

Compression parallel
to grain.

Moisture.

1. It. as 1. R adtested. justed .

tested. j ustod.

- - - - - - --- - - -

~--

I. R. as 1.Rad~--

~--

2.01

1. 87

1. 21

1.19

1. 95

1. 81

PCT ct.
8.3

1. 47

1.42

PeTc/.
7.9

2. 55

2. 30

{Air-dry ... _... _.. _.. _...
488 Kiln run 95 ... _. __ . _.. _.

11. 6
11. 0

1. 84
1. 95

2. 01
2.08

1.31
1. 34

1. 37
1. 38

1.72
1.63

1. 87
1.71

11.1
11.8

1.13
1.17

1.14
1.20

11. 7
12.0

2.02
2. 22

2.26
2.58

{Air-drY . . _.. _.. _... _....
Kiln run no .. _..... _.. _

12. 0
8.0

1. 70
2.09

1. 88
1. 94

1. 32
1.55

1. 40
1. 48

1. 46
1. 48

1.57
1. 42

11.8
9. 9

1. 30
1.46

1. 36
1. 47

12.1
6.6

2.10
3.11

2.44
2.54

224

488
570

Kiln run 149 ... ...... . _.

7.9

2.23

2.03

1. 39

1. 34

1.72

1. 62

7.7

1. 46

1.39

7.8

2.41

2.17

570

Kiln run 150 . __ .........

8. 5

2.08

1.97

1.33

1. 30

1.74

1. 67

10.5 1

1. 36

1. 38

8. 2

2.51

2.40

"\<'iber-saturation point assumed t o be at 24 per cent moisture conteDt.

1. R.= rmprov~ment ratio.

In T able 19 and in figure 18 are given the ratio ' which were available for the first analysis .
These ratios differ lightly from those in Table J and figure 17 because when Table 1 was
BENDING

STATIC

IMPACT
BENDING

/ ,..._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _A '-_ __ _ _ _ _~,

MOO OF RUPTURE

MOO

or clASTlCITY

WORK TO MAX LOAD

COMPRESS/ON
PARALLEL

~

~

MAXIMUM DROP

"'",Tr""O ""..,rC",£D

, '''f'CH~ 0

~

MAX. CR. STRENGTIt

UATC'HCD

~
r-r-

r-

re-

r

t-

rr-

r
>~ ~
"?
<:) <:) ~
~
Q:

~
'C

~

...,

'"
'"
'"
...,

~

-J

~

'~
"

<>

Q:

~

~.

'< '< '<
C)
~ ~ ~ "I..., .;, ~.:.,
-J

, "
..

"
:g
~

.~

It

t-

'"

\.

~

'"

.:{

'~"

r-

rr-

~
It

'"

'-

~ ~

>.

'" ~
~

"<

" '" ''"I
~ "
C)

"-

~

~.

:, ....

\.

Q:
<:)

'l:: It 't
~

"
~ ~ ~
~ ~ " ~
..., ..., ... ...,

.~

r-

t-

,
<:)

r

It

~
'<

Cl

~ ~ ~ '" ~
~

'>; Q:

'C

"
I~
.:,

~ 't I\:: <t
<;
>C

" ~
'" ~ ~ " ":>
...,
.... "" ..., " ...,
.:..

Cl_

~ ~
~
...,

"-

'-

Q;

Q:

<:)

<::>

~

~ ~

'"

~

'!; <\;' Q:
<: -.;
'C
<t>
~
~ '<) '<) ~ ~
-> ~
~ -r
.:, .J
.:.. .... ....
~

~ Q:

"
" ''" " '"
'"
"

'"

~

It

~

'"

Q:

'<)

0,

~

Q:

.:{ 'C

:':'
<>.

'C

.'<)

~

.:,
'"

-J

\0;;

'" :g
'" :g '\I"t 'I

'<>

'1
"- co

"...

t\: ~ ~ i ~
~ '< ~

<:)

~

....

"

.... ..:,

'"
"
"

:-:

~ I ~~

.,.,

~-

F IG. l7.-Improvement ratios for comparison of groups of kiln and air dried stock, western white pine.

made up it became necessary, in order to ecure the best matching, to r eject some specimens,
results from which had been used in making up Table 19.
T ABLE

19.-Average improvement ratios of western white pine.-(Wilk and without adjustment to
[Shipments 224 and 44 .J
Impact bendIng,
hammer.

Static bendIng.

Seasoning.
Moisture.

Modulus of
rupture.

~ O-pound

Modulus 01
elasticity.

Work to maximum load.

I1. R.ss I. R.ad- l. R.as 1. R. ad- 1. R. as I. R.ad-

Molsture.

tested. justed. tested. justed . tested. justed.

~--

PCT ct.
8.0
~~;,d~~9'5::::::::::::::::::: :: :: : 10. 9
Kiln run no .. _. .... . ... __.........
8.0
1

2.01
1. 96
2.09

--- --- --- --- --1.93
2. 16
2.00

Ai r-dl"ied materiallrom shipment 224.

1. 21
1.35
1.55

9

1.19

1. 41

1. 51

.L95
1.64
1.53

-~-

PeT cl.
1.87
8. 3
1. 76
11.6
1. 49
8. 0

Height 01maxlmum drop.
I. R . as 1. R. adtested. jnsted .

per cent·moisture.)

Compression parallel
to grain.
M aximum

Molsture.

--- --- --1.47
1.32
1.42

Per ct.
1. 45
7. 9
1. 40
12.0
1. 39
6. 6

I . R.-Improvement ratio.

crushing
strength.
I. R. as LR.ad·
t ested. justed.
~~-

2.55
2.24
3.12

--2.39
2.74
2.66

51

EFFECT OF KILN DRYI NG ON STRENGT H OF AIRP LANE WOODS.
DISCUS SIO N AND CONCLUSIONS.

As mentioned on page 20, western whi te pine is to be used as an example of the two methods
of analysis:
1. First or preliminary analysis based on comparison of kiln-dried and previously air-dried
material by means of the increa e in strength properties produced by kiln drying as compared
to the previously observed increa e from air drying.
2. Second analysi based on comparisons of matched kiln and air-dried material.
FIRST ANALYSIS.

As the example of thi::; ill t analysi::;, the di::;cus"ion, conclu ions, and recommendations
substantially a given in a report made when the data of Table 19 and figure 18 only were
available will be repeated here .
Discussion.-Figure 18 shows t hat th e improvemen t in strength prop erties produced by kiln drying, with the
exception of work to maximum load, is practically as great as is secured by air drying as determined by previous t esta
from a single tree.

COMPRESS/ON
STATIC

BENDING

M.OF £

/ MOFR.

PARALLEL
~

MAX WONK'

MAX.Cfl.STR.

28

r-

24

r-

2Z

r~

IMPACT
BENDING

r-P'"'"-

r-

12

~

0..:
....

~.
~

It:
«::)

~

<:(

C\I

~

:::,
It:

<::

~

C\;

C)

~

....
.....

CI)

§

~
~

It:

Q

<':

~
oq;

~

~ l~

FIG. 18.-Improvement ratiogfor comparison

It)

<Ij

~

C\j

C\j

It).
0)

,......

':t-

<\I

III

MAX DR OP
~

~

<\I

o

-

1\1

0..:
.....

Cl

.....

t.)
0)

C)

......

.....

:t:
<I")

It:

It:

It:

It:

S
It:

<':

~

It:
....

--./

<':

<':

0)

~ §

....
--./

~

~
«::)

--./

~

of kiln runs 95 and

oq;

100 with

~

~

......

~
~

~

C\I

!(

....

:t
CI)
~

Il::

«::)

~
~

Il..:

~

C)

It)
0)

.....
....
~

~

~

S
It:

It

~

~

It
~
--./

«::)

~ .

~

C)

0)

It:
--./

It)

")

It:

It:
....
oq;

~

<':

~

:::,
~
--./

--./

~ ~

ai;-dried slock of a previous shipment (sltipmcnt 224), weStern wltite pine.

Apparen tly air drying produced in the material of this one tree exceptional improvement in work to ma..'{imum
load . This belief is supported by the fact that in most if not all cases other coniferous woods have shown less increase
in this prop erty. Also the actual values for work to maximum load for the air-dried material of this one tree is higher
than for any other conife rous species except the very heavy and dense ones, such :is longleaf pine. Furthermore, it
is the general, but not invariable, rule that deflection to maximum load should decrease in air drying. Data on
deflections to maximum load are given in Table 20.
TABLE

20.-Average deflections to

m~X'imurn

load with and U'itllOut adjustme:nts.
A~-:;;t ~~~- Kiln run

ri~!~l!~~~~!~~~~i~~~i~~s.~.~l:C:~::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: :~~~~::
Dellection oi seasoned material-adjusted for size of sticks .............................. __ ..... inches ..

Improvement ratio of deUcction 1. .................................................................... .
1

95. Kiln

0.73
O. iJ
.75
.73
2 by 2.11. ;5 by I. i5
. i5
.64
1.03
. 5

Adjusted for Rize of stick and moisture coutenl. All green sticks were 2 by 2inches.

run 110.
O. iO
. 6.

I. 75 by 1. 75

I

.60

.85

52

AN N UAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVI SORY COMMITTE E F OR AERONAU TICS .

From the foregoing it is concluded that the increase in ',ork to maximum l oad obt ained from the one tree previously
air dried is abnormal and t hat the improv ement of the kiln-dried material in this respect has probably been a~ great as
would have resulted had the same material been air dried .
Conclusions.-It is concluded , then, that in all probability runs 95 and no have produced as good results as would
have resu lted from air drying the same material. The conditions in these runs were less severe than pcrmitted by
pecification 20500- A in that the specification admi ts of lower humidities than were 11 ed near the end of the run.
However, the high humidities maintained until the end of the runs (in no because of the very high moisture content of
a single mple) are not believed essential to the preservation of strength properties. A lower humidity would perhaps
have shor tened the time of drying somewhat. Data on material dried in accordance with Specification 20500-A are
not yet available.
The di fficu lty experienced in these runs through large variations in moisture content of the stock. and through dryi ng two th icknesses toget her, emphasi zes the desirability of cla ifying material on the basis of moistu re content and size ,
and of drying each class separately. A rough moisture cl a,~sifi cation such as could be obtained by "hefting" each
piece as loaded into the kiln would probably expedite the drying.
Recom.mendaiions.-It is recommended:
1. That, until additional data on the effect of various temperatures and humidities on the strength of western white
pine can be obtained , Table 1 of Specification 20500-A be used for drying this species.
2. That con ideration be given to grouping material into two or more classes on the basis of moil ture content, and
to drying material of but one moist ure content cla in the same kiln charge or placing the material cont<li ning the most
water in the fastest-drying portion of t he kiln.
SECOND

A~ALYRIS.

Disc'ussion of runs 95 (£nd 110.- R eferring now L figure 17, it is seen that m aterial from kiln
o
r uns 95 and 110 excels matched air-dried mater ial in all properties except work to maximum load.
This is the property in which the kiln-dried material seemed to fall short wh en th e first an alysis
was made. However , this shortage is believed to be en tirely offs et by the superiority in drop
values and in other proper ties.
In fact , almost any reasonable weighting of proper ties and summing up of the effect of cU
'Ying on th e properties as a whole shows that the two kiln runs have been practically equal in their
effect, and have produced results fully as good as air drying.
The difference between r uns 95 and 110 and the corresponding groups of air-dried m aterial
ar e in all probability not are ult of the different methods of seas oning, but are actual inherent
differences in material, impossible to avoid.
'Uns 149 and 150. -I n the absence of air-dried material corresponding to runs
Discussion of 1
149 and 150 it is not possible, of course, to make positive statements in r egard to their eff ec t.
By comparison with th e improvement in the aU'-dried material of shipment 224 and 488,
th e r esult of these two runs seem quite satisfactor, . Mor eover , the l ack of any consist ent or
apparently appreciable superiority of one run over t he other, material for th e two runs having
been secm ed fr om t he same trees and being very much alike (compare "gr een to m atch kiln
r un 149" with " green to match kiln run 150," T able 17), indicates practical equality.
This equ ality, taken together with the fact that r un 149 was at a considerably higher temperature th an 150, migh t also be taken as an indication that, up to th e limits of run 149, no damage
from high temperatur es was t o be expected. Caution mu t be observed here, however. It is indicated by the long period r equired for drying in r un 149, and also shown by r ecor ds of this run, th at
circulation was not good. The n atural accompaniment f poor circulation is nonuniformity of
temp eratures in different parts of the kiln . H ence it is entirely po sible that some of the material
tes ted may not have been subj ected to as severe temper ature condi tions as are indicated in
figure 16.
It must be said that, in gener al, the kiln drying of western white pine in these run has not
been eminently satisfactory . This is attributed largely to the char acter or the material with
respect to moistur e content. As has been mentioned, moisture content h as b een found to b e
very nonuniform.
OoncZ
usions.-It is believed that the data presented herein jus tify the following conclu ions:
1. Western white pine can be kiln dried withou t, damage to strength proper ties.
2. Table 1 of Specification 20500- A can be depended on to ill'Y western white pine without
damage to strength proper ties.
R ecommendations .- I t is r ecommended that, pending the r esults of further tests, the temper atures of Specification 20500-A be no t exceeded in drying wes tern white pine, and that the
humidity and steaming be regulated to keep casehardening to a minimu m.

53

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGT H OF AIRP LANE WOODS.

COMMERCIAL WHITE ASH ..

Eight kiln rlms (81, 82, 83, 90, 96, 97, 92, and 100) have been made on white ash to show
the effect of drying under various combinations of temperatures and humidities.
SOURCE OF M ATERIAL.

Shipment 499 consisted of partially air-dried rough planks furnished by one of the airplane
companies. This furnished material for runs 81, 82, and 83, which included both ash and Sitka
spruce and are previously mentioned as "preliminary r uns."
Shipment 505 consisted of one log from each of 33 trees from southeastern Arkansas.
Three logs were 12 feet long and the remainder 16 feet. Top diameters ranged from 13 to 23
inches and the average total taper from top to butt of log was 61 inches.

-I
A-J
C~ /
C-..3
- - - A - - -1- - -A-~ - - - - - -C-2 - - -I - - C--4- - A-2
I
I

I

8 -/

I

.8 3

0-/

1

/J -:J

~ - -~--i--B~-----O~--r- - -F~--

C#o/s/vrc>

d/SC.

FlO. 19.-Cutting of white ash planks, shipment 499.

Material from logs 1 to 12, inclusive, was dried in run 90. Log 13 to 33, inclusive, were
represented in each of the runs 96 and 97. Mechanical test specimens for runs 96 and 97 were
derived from material from the even-numbered logs.
Shipment 507 consisted of fifty 12-foot logs from near Goshen, Ind. Top diameters ranged
from 11 to 19 inches and the average total taper was 21 inches. Material for runs 92 and 100
was derived from this shipment.
MARKING AND MATCHING.

The material from shipments 505 and 507 "as cut from the logs as illustrated in figure
10, and was marked and matched in the usual manner, as previously described.
Material for rlms 81 and 2 was derived from 10 planks of shipment 499, cut and numbered
as shown in figure 19. Pieces marked " D " were dried in run 81 and those numbered "A"

A-I

I

A -2

- - - A-3 - - /- - - --~ - A

B

~-- --+-----A -s
A -6

- - - - - -1- - - - - A-7

I

,.4 -8

FIG. 20.-Cutting of white ash planks, shipment 499.

in run 82. Sticks A-I , A-4, D- 1, and D-4 were tested as dried; A-2, A- 3, and D-2, and D-3
were steamed and bent after kiln drying ;2 B- 1, B-4, 0-1, and 0-4 were tested partially airdried, or as received at the laboratory; and B- 2, B-3, 0-2, and 0-3 were stored for complete
air drying.3
In grouping data for the analysis of the effect of kiln drying on strength, A sticks were
considered as matched to C, and D to B .
The material for run 83 was taken from 20 planks of shipm~nt 499, cut as shown in figure
20. Piece A was kiln dried and tested, and pieces Band C were t es ted after air drying for
about 11 months.
I Tbe wrute ash t ested was not identified as to exact species. It was, bowever, of some of tbe species included in tbe term "commercial white
asb," tbe most important of whicb are: Wbite asb( Frarinm america1l4), green asb (Frarinm lancwlata), blue asb (Frax;nu8 guadranvuliUa), biltmore asb (Fraxinm biltmoTcana) •
• Tho results of the steaming and bending tests are not to be discussed here.
S 'fhese sticks have not been tested.

54

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
DESCRIPTION OF KILN DRYING CONDITIONS.

Quantity and sizes of stock, method of piling, and condition before and after drying are
given for each kiln run in Table 21. Figure 21 shows the drying conditions for each run.
Steaming to relieve casehardening was done in runs 82 and 90 and IS indicated on the diaglams
(fig. 21) by a sudden high humidity held fo r a short time near the end of the run. I nitial
steaming was used in runs 90, 92, and 96.
TABLE

21.-Description of commercial white ash dried in kiln Tuns 81, 82, 83, 90, 96, 97, 92, and 100.

Run. Amount or stock.
81

Size oJ pieces.

Piling.

Condition ~~~tering tbe

Condition wben taken from
kiin.

10planks. ____ .. . Irinch planks, various
widths.

Open-flat. ...... . . . .. . .... . Partially air dr y; good con· No visible h arm.
dltion except very badly
weatber stained.
82 ..... do ................ do .......... . .. ... ............ do ...... .. ... . ... .. . ... ... .... do . . ... ..... ... . .. . ... . . .
Do.
83 20planks .... ....... . . do ...... . ....... .. ...... ...... do ........ ... ..... .. .... . Partially air dry; s li gbt O.K.
cbecks.
90 71 planks.... .... 2·inch p I an k s, various Close-flat, Ii-inch stiekers Good condition .. . . . . ...... . . Less thun i per cent degrade,
every 2 feet.
widths, 16 feet long.
all being III 7 planks, 6 of
wbicll were cbecked and 1
cupped; no signs of case·
hardening.
96 183 pieces ... .... 2 by 2 inches by 16 feet ..... . Open-flat, It-inch stickers Badly sprung and in some No visible degrade.
every 2t feet .
cases cbecked .
97 202 pieces .......... .. do .. . .......... ....... . . . Open-flat, 2·incb stickers Very badly sprung and No visible degrade; most of
every 2~ feet.
warping was eliminated.
checked.
92 282 pieces. ...... 2 by 2 inches, 10, 12, and 16 Open-flat, It-inch stickers Badly warped, twisted , and No visi ble degrade; twisted
feet long.
every 2 feet .
checked.
and bent condition considcrably relieved.
100 253 pieces . . .. ... 2 by 2 inches by 14fcet .. . ... Opt'n-flat, ll-inch stickers, Good condition ........... . . . N o degrade.
2-inch chimneys.

Am DRYING.

Material was air dried under conditions similar to those previously described for Sitka
spruce and Douglas fir.
STRE GTH DATA.

Average strength values for the various groups of material are given in Table 22.
Table 23 gives the improvement ratios for the more important properties of the air-dried
material and for that dried in the various kiln runs, both without adjustment and after adjustment to 10 per cent moisture. Each ratio given in this table is based on the average of all the
material of any kiln or air dried group, as compared t o the average from the corresponding green
material.
Figure 22 presents in graph form the adjusted improvement ratios of Table 23.
DISCUSSION.

The absence of complete data, i. e., green and air-dried matching that kiln dried; on runs
81, 82, and 83 makes it necessary that they be judged by comparing the improvement they
have produced with that produced in ail' drying the other groups. Proceeding on this basis,
it is seen that 83 is normal or above normal in all respects, while 81 and 82 are quite low in
work to maximum load, and 82 is very low in drop. (See Table 22 and fig. 22.) It is concluded
that 83 has in all probability produced as good r esults as would be secured from air drying,
but that 81 and 82 have failed to give good results in work and drop values which are measures
of shock-absorbing ability and of great importance in airplane materiaL
Careful scrutiny of Tables 22 and 23 and figure 22 shows that runs 90, 96, 97, 92, and 100
are all fully equal to the corresponding air-dried m aterial in the important properties" work to
maximum load" and' drop '~; that all except 90 are equal or superior to air-dried in modulus of
elasticity; and that 96 only is fully equal to the air-dried in modulus of rupture and maximum
crushing strength. Furthermore, run 90 falls very considerably below air dried in these latter
properties. A resunle of the above amounts to this:
1. That the apparent" efficiency" of the kiln drying as shown in figure 22 and Table 24
is greatest for those properties which are least affected by changes of moisture content-work to
maximum load, drop, and modulus of elasticity-and least for those properties which are most
influenced by changes of moisture content-modulus of rupture and maximum crushing strength.
I

55

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

KIL N RUN 82

KILN RUN 81
220
200

220

)\..

~

""'&. ~ p......<

":180

200

Tt.
l:MPcRATURE

h

~/60

160

~/40
~

;;
£MPERATURE

-

r-

180
140

~/20
,,100

\
\

100

~80

\

80

120

~60

,
....,

60

~40

~

cO

--.. r1 V

T

--- -

o

I

2

........

--

~

ItUMI£)ITY

3 ...

~

n ,

40

s,o
li'V'CE},yOI5Tt/tff ZO ........
ASH
""-

SITi
/fA

,..-

5

A

o0

6 /JAYS

2

I

!J 4

t..:

~/40
~/20

..--

~
~/OO
~

~

-

.. t4;
;,

140

100

'\,....

......

~

o

8

p--c

....

60

-

H 'IA 'If) 'T,

~

"-.

40

,."

"'O~ 1U. 'J'

12

7

8 /JAYS

16

r-. ~ ~ l -

20

VR.'E

00

20 DAYS

Ie.

v I-""

!

\

80

rt

20

!l.: 0

h,

120

~bo

0

".

WI,

80
60

5:~

5

160

~

tj40
~

-r 7i.

?

k>v:CE } MOISTURe

K / L NRU N 30

K I LN R UN 83
160

--

~

~ <;.t:

P-X,

<;,

8

1-" I'-..

'I ,

URl1

LJ

!fIr. 'n
I"'""

\
b
'v

/2

/6

20

24

'STURE

28 D4YS

I(ILN RUN 96

K I L N RUN 3 7

":
~40

v --....: :0

~/20

~

'or

~,

~/OO
~ao

]'<P"

~60

.,t-.:

~40 -... I'-< r--c
~ZO
1(0

o

I

2

140

r
1 flT'L
1u
........

120

-

'''Y

iL
-.. /
'"

Mr liS' '71, ?F

3

"" §

6

'£' '/'71'

100

7 8

9

/0 II

/e

\

80

V" ...,..

r

40

........ >-

110. (SI 11/;' il"'

20

OAYS

O

0

I

2

3

KILN Ii'UN /00

~~
~ao

7i. M
~~ ~

~m '.

p..,

'"

,,~

~40

K

'"'<>-,

..........

p.c 1'1' ' ' n
.,...,

:£i
~

4

5' 6

7

8

9

10 II 12 IJ /4 /,5' /6 01lY.5

K /L/V R U N 92
~

@

""' \

j

100

D

80

v

.-.

,A>-

60

h

~/OO

:11>"1/ UI'

'UI. 'IL

MI 'I. ~ TI, ~R)
~

~

--.: r/

~

40

~

r- r- >--.

I( 00 2 4- 6 8 /0 /2 14 16 /8202224 OAYS 0 0

I

2

3

"

:iiI 1M '!J.

n
>-- ~

/I,.

4- 5' 6

i!A i'(, tTl WE

7

8

9

/J,

~T

'/A V-

,-

/0 II 12 13 14 /5161JAYS

FIG, 21.-Kiln conditions for wWte asb kiln fUllS 81, 82, and 83 (sWpment 499), runs 90, 96, and 97 (sWpment 505), and runs 92 and 100
(sWpment 507),

56

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

RATIOS

IMPROVEMENT

I

SHIP. 15 - TfiEE 13
SHIP.IOI-TREE 19
SHIP.21-1--TREE I
SHIP.222-TREE I
SHIP.223-TREE S
SHIP253-TREE.J
SHIP. lS7 - TREE I
KILNRUNlJl
KILNRI/N82
/(IL/V RilN 83
Ao. MATCHIMl K.1i'. jO
KILNRUN90
A. 0. MATCHllluK.R. 96
KILN Rilli 96
A. 0. MATOIlliu K R 97
Kif II' RilN 97
A.OU4TCHIMi If.R 92
/(ILN RilN 92
AOMATQ{INGI{R 100

II

I

I
I

~ ~

~~

~~
V\~

I
I

II

I

I
I

I

~ ~
~

~

~

~
<..;:;

~

~

}~
~

I

~

~

~
:.;

I

KIUIRtlII 81
!(ILN RilN 82
!(ILN Rilli 83
AOMATCHINuIf.R90
IfILNRilN 90
A.OMATCHING K.R96
ifILli' RUN 96
A.o. MATCHINGK R 91
KILN RUN97
Ao.MATCHING K.R 92
'KILN RUN 92
A OMATCIIIN6KR lOt
KILN RilN 100

I

~

I
I
I

I~
~

I

~
\:::;

~
~

I
I

I

I

I

r
l~
~

C\

.

II

~

~

~

I

I

.I

~

II

N
~
\:::;
~

~

~

I

~
c..,
~

~
~
~

~
~

~

§

I

I

~

~

"I

I

~

~

. ~

I

IflLNRUN 83
A 0. MATC
IIIMJ I( R 90
K ILN RilN 90
A o.MATCIIIN(jI('/? 96
/fILNRUN96
A .O MATCII/NO KIi'. 9
KILN RUN 97

~

~

I

~:~

~

~
~

~
~

"-

~
~

'"
'"

~

();,

'"

.~

II

~ I~

rr

I~

I
I

1

I

~

I

~

SHIP1 - Tl?EE /3
S
SHIP.IOI- TREE 19
.5HIPZ/4.- TREE I
~I r--. SHIP.222-TREEI
t>i SHIP.223-TI?EE5
SHIP.lS6 -TI?EE3
~
C\
SHIP 157- Tl?EEI
I" KIUVRilN81
/(1i'. 82
I(ILN RilN 83
A.Ll AiATCHINul(./i'.90
I(ILA' RtlN 90.

~

I

SHIP 15-T
REE 13
SHIPIOI- TREE Ij
SHIP214-TREE I
SHIP.222-TI?EEI
SHIP 22J-1REE5
SHIP 256 - TREE 3
SHIP 2SI-TREE!

I MPROVEMENT
~

I

I

AOMATCHINul(.R.92
KILN RUN·9 2
A.OAlATCI(INOK.I?IOO
I(lbVRtlN 100

'1<~

I~
§: ~

I

II

KIL/V RilN 100

5111P. 75 - TREE1
3
SHIP. 1
01- TREE19
SHIP.lI4 - TREE I
SHIP.222-TREEI
5 HIP.223-TREt: S
5HIP.2f6-TREE 3
SHIP 2f7 - TReE I
!(IUVRUN 81
KILNRUN82

~~

~ s::s

I
I

A.o.MATCH
llltJK.R96
KIUVRtlN%
A.tJ"'IATClllllul(/? 97
KIL/V Rt/N 9 7
A tlMJlTCHIIYGK/lj2 1
,lflLNRilN92
A.Lll,MTCHII$KR,w 1
KILN RtlII 100
I

1
1

I
I

7"-

I

SHIP.
TREE / 3
SHIP.IOI - TREE 19
SHIPlI4- TREE I
SHIP22l-TREE I
SHIP21J-TREE S
SHIP2S6-TI?£E .J
SHIP257- TREE I
I(ILN RilN 81
KILN RilII82
I(IUV RUN 83
AD.MATCHIII() KR.90
I(ILN f(ilN 90

T
I

T
1
I

l
l
l

A.O"'l TCHIMi K/1.96
A
I(ILN RUN 96
A.LlMATCHINO I(R. 97
KILN f(t/N 97
ALJU4TCHIN6KR.92
KILNf(UN 92
AOMAllllIlIICK.R IX
KILNRIIN ItJO

1

I

1

<..--,

~
~

<')

~

~
~
~

I

FIo. !n.-ImprovemeJlt ratios adjusted to 10 per cent moIsture lor comparing ten kiln runs

OD

commercial white ash .

57

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

2. That the run (90) showing the lowest apparent efficiency in modulus of rupture and
maximum crushing strength is the run in which moisture content of the kiln-dried material
is farthest below the corresponding air-dried material; consequen tly, for which adjustment of
moisture had to be made across the widest interval.
ow it is recognized that the methods of moisture adjustment, while the best that it has
been possible to devise, are not perfect, and it can be demonstrated that any errors in the
applicability of the fundamental assumptions underlying the methods of adjustment used will
have the largest percentage effect on the computed" efficiencies" as presented in Table 24, when:
1. Applied to those properties which are most largely affected by change of moisture
content.
2. The interval across which moisture adjus tment must be made is largest.
TABLE

22.-Mechanical properties of commercial white ash (summaries of original test values).
Various shIpments.

ShipmenL 499.

Sh ipment 505.

Tree. Ship.
13
19
1
1
5
3
1

75
101
214

Partially
Air-dry
air-dry
match- Kiln
Kiln match- Kiln
ing
run hI. run 82.
~m~ run 03.
kiln
run 83.
runs

222
223

256
257

1-

Green AIr-dry
match- maich-

Green
Kiln matching
~'1~ kiln run 90. kiln
run 90. run 90.
run 96.
1I1g

?

y
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ I_G_'
r_ec_n.IAi r-dr . - -_. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ___
STATIC BENDING.

41.0
8.9
Moisture (per cent) ' . .. _. . ..... _.. _...... . ... - ... -.
.!)9i
.54
SpecifiC gra\iiy ' ... __ .... - .. , ........ -. - - .. -- - -...
Fiber stress aL clastic limiL(lbs. per sq. in.). _....... 5, i JO Jl,OtlO
Modulus of rupture (lhs. per sq. in.)- .. _....... . ... 10.030 16,9·JO
1,900
Modulus of elastiCity (1,000 Ibs. per sq. in .) ... .. . -. 1, 509
1.26
3.64
Work to clastic limit (inch-Ill'.
cu. in.) .... - .. 15.4
\\ ork La max,mum load (inch-! s. ver cu. ill.) . .. - 14.29
30.5
Work, total (inch-Ibs. per Cll. ill.) ................. 4U.29

'J.4
.5i
8.560
la 460
1:689
2.52
0.34
1.9

7.2
.602
9,300
14.250
1,676
2.97
Jl.2
1 .3

7,21>0
12,410
1,569
1. 9.1
13.3

10,340
3.46
13 . .i
23.2

........

17.0
..;60
1;',290
2,151
6.1
32.4

4.8
.581
17,750
2, iO~

3U

7.2
. 5'>6
15.510
2,616
5. 4
10.1

13.5
..;56
19, 120
3,~
3 ' .0

6.0
.,;99
21,750
2,697
9. 9
4 .1

!G. 5
. 558
4,650

4.7
.586
9,3 0

7. 4
..;91
,380

6,530

~1;J

6.9
.592
8, 0

~ :i~~

6,2HO
10,940
1,437
1. r;.s
13.40
21.0

Ear

12.6

45.1
.534
5,460
,940
1,349
1. 30
13.0

12. 9
.574
8,320
12,970
1,563
2.49
12.51

.9
.556
, 110
13,970
1,613
2.32
12.2

42.4
.519
4,910
,520
1,266
1.10
12.20

44.4
. 542
13,030
1 &IS
J 5. 1
43.1

12.8
.587
13,R 0
2,254
4.7
34. 1

.8
.;;96
J3,200
2,026
4.8
36.0

41.0
.li27
10,020
1,00'1

45.8
.531
3, 730

12.5
.578
6, 00

9.0
. 590
6,990

43.5
.518
3, j' 0

... ..... ...... ..

~

1,546

1,567

28

::::::::1 1,919
1,441

954
60
9

1 ,~~~
1,27

1,691

1,006

1 J 292

909

1,2:;0

1, 358

940

1, 364
1,316

1,920
1,774

2,036
1,966

1, 2,6
1,262

.56~

J~

16,~~
1,74

........ .. ......

lMPACT DENDING, so-rOUND TlAMMLR .

41.6
.534
12,2-0
Modulus of elasticity (1,000 Ibs. per ''t. in.) .... .... 1,605
5.2,5
Work to clasiic limit (inch-Ibs. lJer Cn. in.) ........
Drop causing complete failure (inches). _..........
3 .7
~[ i~ture(pe:ce~t)' .. --

..... - ... .. ... - .. - .........

wr~~~tf;;·~iyelasiici;mit· (Its.·per 'sq'- in:i:::::::

CO~IPR ES

.7
.,592
19,500
2,IR9
9.77
39.0

I

~

..,

43. 6

ION PARALLEL "0 GRAIN".

Moisture (per centl' .......... _...... . ... .. ... . ... _

~a~fmc,E;a;;~;;iJ;g Strei,g-tii iib -: per ·s·ci. 'ioY::::::
COMPRESSION PERPENDICULAR TO GR

42.2
.541
4,310

9.0
.597
8,760

-5

1,772

\l~.

Crushing strength at elastic limit (Ibs. per sq. in.) . . HARDNESS, BALL Tt-;ST.

~~~i~f~~~lis'):::::::::::::::::::::::::: :: ::::: ::
'rangent,al (pounds) ........................•......

1 ___ .- ........ ........
...
I

1,033
952
904

1,964
1,422
1,398

1, 171

1,299
1,284

2,106
2,020

. .. . . ...
.. . . . . ..

1,021)

1,0,,0

1,410
1,305
1,2,ih

2,1!b I
1. 377

I

1,440

1,·153

SIIEARIN G STRENGTH.

Radla! (lb ·Rersq.in.)- .. .. ... ... . ............... Tangential ( bs. per sq. in. )- .... ........ _....... _..

........ ....... . ....... . ........
..... ... ........ ...... .. ........

TENSION PlmPENDICULAR 1'0 ORAIK.

Radial (11),. r er sq. in. ) ..... . ..... . _. . ............•
Tangential ( bs. per sq. in.) ... . ....... _. _..........•

5.51
679

10 ....... . ........ ........ ........ .. .. ....
79 ........ ........ ........ . ... .... ... .....

60~

;;61

I

CLEAVAGE.

Radial (Ibs. Rer inch of width) . . . .... . ........ . ....
Tangential (bs. per inch ofwi<1th ) .... _•. . ...... _..

934
677

330
376

457
248

........ ........

·"'-"' -1'-"-'" .... -. -.
·-···-l·······r······

433 . .......
415 . ..... ..

329
3U'.l

58

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVI ORY COMMITTEE FOR AERO
TABLE

AUTICS .

22.-Mechanical properties of commercial white ash-Continued.
Shipment 50S-Continued.
Air-dry
matchin~

kiln
run 96.
STATIC BE DI'fG.
~ois tur e (I>er cent) I . . . . . _. ' .. . _ . .. . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . .
13.0
SpecifiC gravity , __ .:. _:.: . .... ....... . . : . ... . . .... .
. 5i7
Fiber stress at elastIC IUUlt (IbN. per SQ. tn.) .. .. .. . . 7,720
Modulus of rupture (lbs. per sq. In .) .. _: .......... . 12,9\0
Modulus of e l a~t l c lt y (1 ,00011>,. per sq. In.) ..... _.. . 1,502
Work to elastic lilllit (inch-Ihs. per cu. in.) . __ '" __
2.17
Work to maximum load (inch-Ibs. per cu. in.) '" _.
13.0
Work, total (inch·lbs. per cu . ill.) ................ .

Kiln
rUII 96.

Shipment 507.

Green Alr-dry
ma tch- matchrGln
iug
ing
run 97.
kiln
kiln
run 9;. run 97.

- -1 12.2
. .166
7,640
13, 7~0

42.1
. 52.;
5,110
,,20

13.0
. 579
7,~70

12, 930
I , nl
1,.521;
2.10
1.172.24
14. 45
12. 7;; I 12. ii
41. G .•. _••... _.• ____
I ,M;:)

12.9
..596
7,210
12, ~O
1,613
1.86
13.6
. ..... . .

Green Air-dry
match· match- Kiln
ing
ing
run 92.
kiln
kiln
run 92. run 92.

35. ~
12. 7
. 56.5
.599
.S,770
9,390
9,7.iO 14,340
1,4;,2
1,729
1.30
2.94
15. 12
16.32

11.0
.619
,00
15,2,0
1,796
2. '14

16.50

Green .\ir-dry
match- match- Kiln
ing
ing
kiln
kiln run 100.
run 100. runl00.

36.0
.;'61
T',6 0
9,660

1~9~
9,340
14,280
1,736
2.96
15.03

11. 3
.612
9,240
15, 020
I , 33
2. 63
IS.9

4.R
53.3

12.7
.60·1
16.3·;0
2,16,
7. 0
42. 2

11 .2
. RO~
13,310
2,2'1
4.4
41 .3

1, Cl~
1. 28
16. 47

I'M PACT BENDING, 6O-1'OUND HAMMER .

Moisture (per cent) I .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . _.
f'\)ecifle ':r9vity '_. : .. : _.: . . .... . . . .. _..... _...... ..
FIber stress at clastic 11l111t (Ibs. per sq. In .) . .... _ .. _
Modulusofel,¥, iritl (I,OOO lbs. [lersq. !n. ) .. _.. ___..
Work to elastIC III1IIt (lllch-ibs. per cu. In .) ..... _...
D rop cau~ing complete [ailure (inches) .......... _'"

13. 4
. ,567
2,015
4.2
36.4

11. 9
..; 2
12, 1I0
2,176
3. 8
3:;, H

12.9
.570
6,260

6,660

1,46';

40.2 1

13.2

36.7
. 579

:;2.6

12.6
. 604
16.310
2.145
7.0
41.7

3i. O
. 56[j
3, 950

12.8
.611
6,770

11.
.626
7,3

36.9
.503
3,920

12. ~
.610
6,7:;0

1\.
_60.5
7,310

904

1,641

1,642

904

1, 641

1,630

1,464
1,164
1,226

97R
950
9 1

1,651
1 , 2~

1,753
1,299
1,364

975
944
981

1,648
1,293
1,375

1, 914
1, 42.1

1,382

1,911
1,820

1,363
1,363

2,2.54
2,083

2 053
2;021

1,363
1,363

2,2;4
2,083

2, 1~) l
2,085

4.2
36.7

11.9
..;70
12,100
1,99,;
3.9
36.1

43. !i
. 51h
3,780

12.9
..170
6,260

12.6
.,'i69
6,240

1,490

82S

1,46,;

1,196

1,430
1,191
1,398

1,469
1,232
1,24.;

1,006
940

1,430
I, 1~~
1,39

2,110
1,876

2,079
I , '2

1,286
1,262

2, 1l0
1, i6

60R
561

736
838

329
309

446
341

1 2,2~0

. .529
10,17 0
1,590
3. i
40.6

..:,)72

12.ii40
2,0~2

1 2,~0

1,910
4.X

11.1
.617
13.4,~0

2,334
4.5
44. [i

36.7
.567
12, 700
1, iG

COMPRESSION PARAt.LEL 1'0 GRAIN.

(per cent)' .. . ... _..... . . _............... ..
"ocoinc gravity'. _. .................. _. _. _.. __ ... .
Maximum crushing stren gth (lbs. per Q. in.) ..... ..

~{oisturc

12.

°

. ,3i2

°
°

°

COMPR ESSION PERPENDICULAR TO GRA IN .

Crushing strength at elastic limit (lbs. per sq. in .) .. .
llARDN ESS, HALT.. T'EST.

~~~i~~(~~~si: : ::::::::::::::::::::::: ::: :: : ::: :

TangentIal (pounds) . . . .... ...... _....... ... ...... .

909

1,50,5

SUEARING STRENGTU.

Radial (lbs. per sq. In .)_ ... _....................... .
'fan&entlal (Ibs. per sq. in .) ..... _. . ....... __ ..... __ .
TENSION PERPENDICULAR TO GRAIN.

Radial (1bs . per sq. in.) .. __ ..... -._._ ..... - ..... - .-.
Tanscu tial (lbs . per sQ. in. ) .. . _... _.............. __ .

736
838

CLEAVAGE.

Radial (lbs . per inch in width) ........ . . ........... .
TanGential (Ibs. per incb of width) .. ... _........ _. _.
I

Per cent moisture based on oven-dry weight.

• Specific gravity based on oven-dry weight and volume at test.

NOT~;S:

Shipment 75-Green ash ( FrlJIinu, lallceolala) grown in Richland Parish, La.
Shipment !o1-White ash (Fralinu8 americana) grown in Stone County} Ark.
hipment 214-White ash (Fralinu8 americana) grown in Oswego oumy, N. Y.
Shipment 222-Blue a,h ( F mlinu8 quadranq lliala) ~rowll ill Bourbon County, Ky.
Shipment 223-Green ash (Frarinu-sZanceolata) grown in Now Madrid CoWlty, Mo .
Shipment 256-White ash (Frarim,s a71lrricana) growl] in Pocaholltas County, W. Va.
Shipment 257-13iltmore ash (Frali n"" bi/tmorrana) grown in Overton County, T enn.
T est specimens of shipment 499 were 1.2.; by 1.2; inches.
Values of drop, sbipment 499 adjllStod to 2 by 2 inch sticks.

59

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.
TABLE

23.-Commercial white ash.

(Improvement ratios with and without adjustment to 10 per cent moisture. oj hln-dried
and air-dried material.)
[Fiber·saturation

polnt~ 20

pcr cent moisture.]

Ship·
ment.

Modulus 01
rupturc.

Seasoning.
Mois·
ture.

1499

Mois·
ture.

1.54
1.78
1.73
1.53
1.61
1.92
1. 68

1.65
1.83
1.65
1.51
1. 57
1.65
1.43

{Kiln run 81. .....•......
Kiln run 82 . ............
Kiln run 83 ....... ......

4. 4
7.2
6.2

1.23
1.30
1. 56

8.9
12.9

Kiln run 96 .............
Air dry ...... ... ...... ..

1.22
1.37
1.22

Per cl.

1.35

1.96
1.93
1.97
1.77
1.76
2.01
1.92

1.14
.30
1.42

4.7
7.4
6.8

2.02
1.80
1.35

1. 2
1.91
1.85

.72

.86

9.0
12.5

1.88
1.82

1.78
2.22

2
. 835

.78
.76

J2.0
12.9

1. 77
1.66

2.05
2.05

11.9
13.2

.89
.90

.87
.86

12.6
12.9

1.65
1.66

1.97
2.05

1.01
.90

11.1
12.6

.85
.79

.83

.73

U.O
12.8

1.87
1.71

2.00
2.10

.96
. 9

11.2
12.7

.7
.79

.75
.72

11 .0
12.8

1.87
1. 72

2.01
2.12

1. 20
1.31
1. 32

1.21
1.27
1.035
.97
1.11
.985
1.08

H.3
10.8
9.0
9.3
9. 3
6.2

1.20
1.35
2. 00

1.18
1.17
1.12

1.16
1. 20
1.20

.62
.84
1.03

1. 56
1.45

1.49
1.69

1. 197
1.16

1. 15
1.23

12.2
13.0

1. 62
1.52

1. <
1.83

1.25
1.19

12.9
13.0

1.46
1.47

1.70
1.74

Air dry .... . . .. .........

11.0
12.7

1.57
1.47

U.3
12.6

1.56
1.48

r,m", 1

I. R.
1. R.
adas
testcd. justcd.

2.04
1.85
1.80
2.50
2.60

1.1~

1.26
1.04
.97
1.12
.98
1.01

Air dry ..........••. ....

I . R.

U.2
10.5
9.5
9.6
9. 6
6.9
5.4

1. 2f')

1.3U
1. 20
1.14
1.19
1. 23
1. 21

Kiln run 100 .....••..... 1

R.

- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Kiln run 97 .............
Air dry ......... ..•.....

607

11.4
10.4
9.0
9.7
9.5
7.0
5.6

Kiln run 90 .............
Air dry .................
505

r.

Maximum crush·
ing strength.
l'i10isturc.

as
ad·
tested. justcd.

Per ct.

Perct.

Air dry .................
..... do . .............. .. .
..... do •.................
..... do .. . ..........•....
. .... do ... .. ... . .•••.....
... . . do ...... . ...........
. . ... do ................ ..

Hcight of
maximum drop.

Work to maximum load.

I. R.

as

---75
101
214
222
223
256
257

Modulus 01
elastiCity.

I. R.
r. R. 1. R. 1. R.
adadas
ad·
as
tested. justod. tested. justcd. tested. justcd.

I.R.

Compression pamllcl to
grain.

Impact bending,
50-pound hammer.

Static bending.

5.3

1.00
1. 04
.98
.97
.82
.9
1.55

.66
.82
1.05

4. ~
7.2
5.9

1.17
.31
1. 30

.94
.96

.95
.94

8.8
12.

.79

1.33
1.28

1.1
1.07

1.24
1.10

11. 9
13·4

1.25
1.1

1.37
1.27

1.07
1.00

1.10
1.00

1.65
1. 70

1. 24
1.19

1.27
1.27

1. 01
.93

1.67
1.70

1.28
1.21

1.33
1.29

1.15

.97
.915

I

1.00
1.035
.9
.97
.83

.99

1.81
I.R7

1

kiln·dried
11. R. as tested- air.dried (no green to match) .
TABLE

24.-EjJiciencics jor lciln runs on white ash .
Shipment 505.

Property.

F

Kiln run 90.
E

EXF

Kiln run 96.
E

EXF

Shipment 507.
Kiln run 97.

Kiln run 92.

Kiln run 100.

E

E

E

EXF

E XF

EXF

- - - - - - - -- - - - 1 -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Pe: cenl.
Per c nt.
Pereellt.
Per cent.
Per cent.
195.4
97.7
195.4
97.0
194.0
97.7
Moduluso(rupture . ............•. .. . 2
.1
176.2
101.1
202.2
412.4
107.9
431.6
103.1
100.0
400.0
Moduluso(elasticity .... .. ...... . •.. 4
93.5
374.0
103. ~
415.2
330.0
112.1
336.3
110.0
107.9
323.7
Work. ...................•. .. . ... ... 3
101.1
303.3
112.~
33 .4
101. 1
104.1
312.3
Drop ................................ j 3
119.2
357 . 6
102.7
30.1
303 . 3
113.6
340.8
94.8
1 .6
192. 4
96.2
95.3
190.6
Compression parallel. ............... 2
SO.3
160.6
100.0
200.0
1. 433 . 4
:E(EXF) .............. . ................. .. ......... 1.371.7 .......... 1,463.9
1'1~:~
102.4
:E(EXF) ... :EF-welghted average E.. .... ..... .....
9.0 ..........
101.6
5Oi.6 ......... .
:EE . .... . ............................ ....
42.2 ..........
520.4 ......... .
51.0 .......... 1
512.9 ..........
96.4 ..........
10·\.1 ....... .. .
102.6 ..........
103.6 ......... .
101.5 ......... .
:EE ... s-averageE ................... ....

:::::::::: l,t&l:!

1

F= Weighting (actor
E- Efficiency

Improvemcnt ratio (or property o( kiln dry
Improvemen t ratio for same property o( corresponding air dry

CO CLUSIO S.

From the above discussion the following conclusions are drawn:
1. Runs 81 and 82, made on partiftlly air-dried material at high temperatures (1 0 0 to 210 0 F.)

and with comparatively low humidities, resulted in rather evere damage to the important
properties of work to maximum load and drop. (It is notable that neither of these runs produced
any visible damage.)
2. Run 83 on partially air-dried material, and 90, 96, 97, 92, and 100 on green,at more moderate temperatures (initial 100 0 to 125 0 F. and maximum 120 0 to 160 0 F.) and omewhat higher
humidities, have all produced material praotically equal in mechanical properties to air-dried.
3. Results of thi latter group of kiln runs furnish no basis for coordination between severity
of kiln conditions and effect on mechanical value of the product.
4. From 2 follows the conclusion that Table 1 of pecification 20500-A i a safe schedule for
the drying of white ash.

60

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY

OMl\lITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

RECOMMENDATION.

Itis recommended thatin drying white ash for use where the retention of maximum strength
is essential, the temperatures of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A should not be exceeded.
PORT ORFORD CEDAR.

Four kiln runs have been made on P ort Orford cedar.

The run were numbered 124, 125,

126, and 157.

Kiln run 124 subjected the tock to lightly milder condition than tho e specified in
Table 1, Specification 20500-A.
Run 125 wa made under rather severe high-temperature conditions. From an initial
temperature of 165 0 F. and a relative humidity of 0 per cent, near the fiber-saturation point the
temperature reached 175 0 F. and the relative humidi ty 40 per cent, ending with a temperature of
152 0 F. and a relative humidity of 35 per cent.
The temperatures and humidities called for by Table 2 of pecification 20500-A were used
as a basi for the conditions of kiln run 126.
] or kiln run 157, a practically constan t temperature of 120 0 F. with a relative humidity of
o per cent wa used.
PHYSICAL RESULTS.

The average moisture content of green material in all four run wa 35 per cent, with samples
from 124 containing 32 per cent, 125 con taining 38.2, 126 containing 35.5, and 157 containing
33 per cent. The moisture contents were reduced to 8, 4,8.2 , and 8 p l' cent re pectively. The
time varied from eight days for run 125 to thirty-eight days for run 157, with run 124 taking
nineteen days and run 126 twenty-eight days. Runs 124 and 125 showed practically no visible
degrade, while run 126 and 157 showed 3 and 8 per cent, re pectively.
MECHA NICAL RESULTS.

Comparison of kiln-dried material with previou ly tested air-dried material shows improvement ratios for the kiln-dried material lower in varying degree than for air-dried material for all
properties except maximum crushing strength in compression parellel to grain. The kiln
material approximately equals air-dried in modulus of elasticity in static bending, lagging slightly
behind air-dried material in modulus of rupture in statio bending, and dropping well behind the
air-dried for work to maximum load in static bending and drop in impact bending. There are
no appreciable differences in the improvem ents of the first three kiln runs, all being exceptionally
uniform. Run 157, however, is somewha.t erratic. It is noticeably higher than the previous
runs in improvement in work to maximum load, and noticeably lower in drop in impact bending.
CONCLUSIONS.

The previously tested air-dried material with wh ich the kiln-dried is compared came from one
tree only, and from evidence at hand it i concluded that it showed exceptional improvement
in air drying. It is therefore probable that the kiln-dried material gave as great improvement
as it would have done had it been subjected to a long period of air easoning. A comparison
of various kiln runs shows no significant difference in the improvement in strength values between the different runs, in spite of a considerable range of the temperatures used in drying.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

In view of the fact that positive conclusions can not be reached until tests have been made
on air-dried material corresponding to that kiln-dried, and the further fact that any lack of control of kiln conditions is more likely to result in damage when attempting to run by a high-temperature schedule, it is recommended that higher temperatures and lower humidities than those
of Table 1, Specification 20500-A, should not be used in drying Port Orford cedar, unless there
is urgent need for rapid drying, and then only in case the kiln operation is in charge of an experienced man.

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

61

BALD CYPRESS.

One kiln run has been made on bald cypress. In this run 2 and 3 inch material was dried,
using the temperatures and humidities of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A. During the last two
weeks of the run it was not possible to reduce humidity below 40 per cent, thus causing a departure to that extent from Table 1. It was necessary to steam nine different times at temperatures
ranging from 150 0 to 176 0 F. for periods of one to five hours, to relieve casehardening. (Total
time of steaming 2H hours. )
PHYSICAL RESULTS.

The average moisture content was reduced from 91.8 to 7.3 per cent in 80 days, with an
average visible degrade of 8 per cent due to springing and warping.
The material from butt logs was found to dry much more slowly than that from upper logs.
MECHANICAL RESULTS.

The kiln-dried material gave practically as grea~ an improvement in static bending as
previously air-dried material, the former being noticeably greater in "work". The kiln-dried
material from lower bolts gave a greater improvement than that from the upper bolts in every
case except drop in impact bending. In this property, and also in maximum crushing strength
in compression parallel to grain, the air-dried material gave a greater improvement than the
kiln-dried material.
CONCLUSIONS.

It is not possible from results in one kiln run to form final conclusions on the proper method
of kiln drying this species. From data collected it is concluded that:
1. Upper-log material can be dried much more rapidly than that from butt logs, and the
two classes should be dried separately.
2. Cypress require more than ordinary care in drying in order to prevent checking, honeycombing, warping, and casehardening.
3. Cypress can be kiln dried so as to produce material equal in it mechanical properties to
air-dried n;taterial, but final judgment on this point can not be reached until matched material
has been air dried and tested.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

1. That butt-log material and material from upper logs be kiln dried separately.
2. That, pending the results of further test, the temperatures of pecification 20500-A
should not be exceeded in drying bald cypress, and that humidity and steaming be regulated to
keep casehardening at a minimum.
WESTERN HEMLOCK.

Two kiln runs have been made on 3-inch material of thi species. In one run the material
was dried by using temperatures and humiditie approximately as called for by Table I, Specification 20500-A (temperature 120 0 F. initial, and 145 0 F. final; humiditie 80 per cent initial,
and 35 per cent final). This resulted in decreasing the moisture content from an average of
79 per cent to an average of 6.7 per cent in a period of 33 days, with a resultant visible degrade
of 3 per cent due to opening up of checks.
The second, which was a high-temperature run (temperatures 160 0 F. initial to 1 0 0 F.
final, with humidities 70 per cent initial to 50 per cent final), compares favorably with the
fir t run both in time required for drying and in amount of degrade. The time was 19 days to
reduce the moisture content from 9 .4 per cent to .2 per cent, as compared with 25 days to
reduce to 4.8 per ce~t for the first run. The average visible degr'ade was Ie s than 1 per cent.
The fiT t run had only slight indications of casehardening on resawing, while severe casehardening was indicated in the second run.
MECHANICAL RESULTS .

The two runs are practically equal to each other and to previously-tested air-dried material
in improvement of modulus of rupture and work to maximum load in tatic bending. However,
in modulus of elasticity, while the high temperature run equals the air-dried, the Table 1 run falls

62

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY

OMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

considerably lower. Both runs fail to show impro vement equal to th at shown by previously
tested air-dried material in impact drop and compression p arallel to gr ain. Were it not for the
known facts concerning the va:.r iability of timber- and of improvement ratios as previously
brought out in this report- case of inieriority in im rovement to previously air-dried material
might be assumed to indicate actual damage re ulting from kiln drying. However, the fact that
the more severe kiln conditions have produced material practically equal in all and considerably
superior in some properties to that result ing from kiln drying under milder conditions is accepted
as the better basis of judgment. Groups of mat erial t ested after drying in the two kiln runs
are closely matched to ea h other ; henc e, comp arisons between the runs are much more accurate
and positive than comparisons 'with the air-dried material.
CONCLUSIO S .

The conclusion that neither kiln process damaged the material must be r egarded as tentative,
pending testing of matched air-dricd material, but it is believed that conditions scheduled in
Table 1 of Specification 20500-A are safe for drying western hemlo ck. Probably considerably
higher temperatures could be used without damage.
RECOM M ENDATIO S.

In view of the fact that positive conclusions can not be r eached until t ests have been made
on air-dried material corresponding t o that kiln dried, and th e further f act that any lack of control
of kiln conditions is much more likely t o result in d amage when attempting t o run by a higher
temperature chedule, it is reco mmended that T able 1 of Specification ~ 050 0-A be used in
drying western hemlock.
WHITE AND NORWAY PINE.
T

Material of both white and .1. orway pine was dried in each of two kiln runs. One run
was made with tempcrature varying from 180 0 to 200 0 F. and r elative humidity varying from
76 to 60 per cent. The second kiln nm followed quite closely the schedule of temperatures
and relative humidities of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A.
P HYSICAL RESULTS .

The result of the first run wa that thc white pine was dried from an average moisture conent of 99 per cent to an aver agc of 5.3 per cent and the Norway pine from 22.5 to 6 per cent
L
in a period of 16 days. Both pecies had a vi ible degrade of about 6 per cent, due mostly
to checking. The high temperature cau ed the pitch and resin t o flow to the surface and
harden.
In the second run the white pine was dried from an average moisture content of 99 per
cent to an average of 10 per cent and the Norway pine from '3 5.5 per cent to 8 .6 per cent in a
period of 67 days. Both species had a visible degrade of 6 per cent, due to checking, twisting,
and warping.
MECHANICAL RESULTS.

The results from the mechanical tests on mall clear specimens indicate that the two runs
produced approximately as good improvement in nearly all values as resulted from previous
air drying and that, in spite of the great difference in temperature, the two runs produced
about equally good results. The high-temperature r un gave considerably better improvement
in modulus of rupture and maximum crushing trength of Norway pine, and slightly better in
modulus of elasticity of both specie , while in other values the low temperature run gave
slightly, but not significantly, better improvement.
CONOLUSIONS.

It is concluded that there is no damaging effect t o be expected from temperatures as high
as were used in this instance. This conclusion , how ver, must be regarded a tentative until
confirmed or disproved by tests on matched material which is now air drying.

63

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

Table 1 of Specification 20500-A is recommended for use in drying these species until
additional data can be obtained on the effect of various temperatures and relative humidities
on the strength.
WHITE FIR.

Two kiln runs have been made on white fir, in stock of 3-inch thickness and various widths.
The temperature in one run ranged from 160 0 F. initial to 180 0 F. final. The other run followed quite closely the schedule of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A, as shown in Table 25.
TABLE

25.-Kiln conditions used in runs

157

and

158,

compared with Table 1 of Specification 20500-A.
A verage drying conditions.

Stage of drying.'

Temperatures.

Humidities.

Kiln run
157.

~i~~e~ent. ~o~~~u~~:::::: :::::: ::::::::: : ::: :::::::::::: ::: :::: :::::
I

Table 1.

KHn run
157.

Kiln run
158.

Degref8 F.

At the beginning. . . .... .. .... ......................... ................
After fiber·saturation point is passed (25 per cent moisture)..... .......
At 20 per ceut moistlU'c................................................
At 15 per cent moisture................................................
At 12 per cent moisture... .... . ............ ...................... ......

Kiln run
158.
Degrees F.

Degre.. F.

Per cent.

Per cent.
70-80
75
75
71
71
68
50

120
120
120
125
125

~:~

163

165
170

177
179

1 1
1 0

120
125

128

138

142
145
145

80

o

80
70
60
37
33

Table 1.
PCT

cent.
80
70
60
H
38
33
33

As determined from moisture contents of samples.

Kiln run 157.-This run was made in a kiln which had been equipped with fans to produce
circulation.
The material was steamed 1 hours at 136 0 F . before the kiln conditions given in Table 25
were established. Casehardening stresses which developed during the run made four additional steamings necessary, at temperatures of 135 0 to 160 0 F., for periods of one to two hours.
(Total time, six hours.)
Drying from an average moisture content of 100 to 8.2 per cent was accomplished in 57
days, with an average visible degrade of about 8 per cent. This degrade was the result of
twisting, warping, and surface checking.
Kiln run 158.-Thi run was started without preliminary steaming, but it was necessary
to steam six times (total time 19 hours) during the run to relieve casehardening. The steaming
periods ranged from one and one-half to six hours, at temperatures ranging from 170 0 to 1 2 0 F.
The material was dried from an average moisture content of 149 to 7.7 per cent in 12 days;
but. in order to relieve casehardening it was necessary to continue the run for 9 days, during
which the moisture content of the samples was reduced to 5.1 per cent. The moisture content
of the green material ranged from 69 to 208 per cent.
The material was in good condition on entering the kiln, although everal pieces showed
end and heart checks, shakes, and springing. After being dried the material came out with an
average degrade from warpmg, springing, twisting, and surface checking of approximately 6
per cent.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS.

The material was compared with various air-dried firs (silver, grand, and noble) as well as
white fir. In every case, except maximum drop in impact bending, kiln run 157 is superior to
the average of the air-dried firs. Kiln run 158 is somewhat lower than thi average in maximum
drop in impact bending and in maximum crushing strength in com pre ion parallel to grain.
Both runs produced material which was batter in improvement of trength propertie than
material from the one available tree of air-dried white fir, except in com pre sion parallel to the
grain. In this property the high-temperature run (15 ) was inferior to the air-dried material.
It appears that no significant damage OCCUlTed to the strength properties from either kiln
treatment, and it is probable that the Table 1 run (157) produced at least as good results as
would have resul ted from air drying.

64

AN NUAL RE PORT N ATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

1. P ending the completion of tests on air-dried material matching that kiln dried, it is
recommended that T able 1 of Specification 20500- A be used in drying white fir for use where
maximum strength is e sen tial.
2. If faster drying th an can be produced by folJ owing the above recommendation is necessar y, the temperatures as used in run 158 appear to be fairly safe, providing the humidity is
regulated to prevent severe casehardening.
3. Becau e of the large variation in moisture content of different boards of this pecies, it
is recommended that this m aterial be divided into two or more groups according to the weight
of the pieces, which i an indication of the m oisture content, and that either the groups be
kiln dried separately or the heavier material be placed in the most rapid drying part of the kiln.
AFRICAN A D CENTRAL AMERICAN MAHOGANIES.

Mechanical t e ts have been made on small, clear pecimens of material from several experi.merican mahoganies. Run 106, 107, 108, and 109
mental kiln runs on Mrican and Central .A
included both specie . Central Ameri an mahogany was dried in runs 161 and 162, and Mrican
mahogany in runs 164 and 165.
The ranges in temper atures and humidities for all eight runs are given in Table 26, whi ch
also lists, for the purpose of comparison, the temperatures and humidities of Tables 1 and 2 of
Specification 20500-A.
T A.BLE 2(j.- Kiln conditions used in runs tOe, 10-:, 108, 109 , 161, 162, 164, and 165, compared with Tables 1 and 2 oj

Specification 20500-A .
Average drying conditions-temperatures.
Stage of drying.

I

Kiln rlUl Kiln run Kiln run Kiln run Kiln run Kiln rlUl Kiln rtm KiiJ"un
106.

107.

108.

109.

161.

162.

164.

165.

T able 1.1 Table 2.>

- - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Degrees F. Degrees F. Degrees F. Degreu F. Degreu F. Degrees F. Degrees F. Degrees F. Degrees F. Degrees F.

Tbe beginning. .. ...... . . ... .. ...... . . . ..
lOS
ISO
90
120
After fiber saturation poin t, is passed (25
per cent moisture).. . .. . . ...... . .. . .. ..
10~
180
95
12tl
At 20 per cent moisture.. . . . .. . .. . ..... ..
llO
180
Ig~
120
At 15 per cent moist ure.. . ..... . ..... . ...
115
180
1l~
130
At 12 per ('cnt moisture. ... . .... . . .. . .. ..
116
180
118
120
At per cent moist ure.. . . . . ..... . ... .. .. . ... .. .... .... . ..... .... . ..... ..........
F inal....... ... ..... .. .. ... . .............
lI81
100
120
138

105

120

105

115

120

105

100
100

128
130
128
150
154
147

108

104
107
118
120
120
129

125
128
138
142
145
145

110
117
129
135
135
135

116

128
135
135

110

118
131
130

90

A voragc drying ('ondit ions-llumidities.
Stage of drying.

I

Kiln run Kiln run Kiln rtm Kiln run Kiln run Kiln run Kihlrun Kiln run T
106.

107.

1 .

109.

161.

162.

164.

165.

I

ab 0 1.1 T able 2.l

-------------I--------- ------ --- ------~---

Per cent. Per cent. Percent. Percent. Percent.

I~~~t:':)~~tu~aiiori 'point 'is' pMscci (25'

per cent moisture) . .. . . . . . . ... ... . ... . .
At 20 per cent moisture . . . . .. ...... .. ... .
At 15 per cent moisture .. . . . . . . .. . . . ... ..
At 12 per cen t moisture . . . .. . ... . . . . ... ..

~fn~e ~.~t. I~~~~~~~'~: ::::::::::: ::::: ::
I

85

85

6

80

9·1-85

75
72
68
65

85

75
65
50
42

70
72

85
85

00

80

42

54

per8~:~ Per cent. Percent. Per cent. Percent.
97
82
80
85

80
76
57
50
46
46

90

78
76
72
6l
61
64

74
74
65
42
43
60

80
74
60
50
50
55

70
00
44
38
33
33

73
62
46
42
40
40

'rhese a re maximum allowable temperatures anel minimum allowable humid ities .

The length of t ime r equ ired fo r drying, the amount of degr ade, and the original and final
average moisture content fo r each run are all given in Table 27.
T ABLE 27 .- Physical results oJ various kiln rUM oj African an d Central A merican mahoganies.
Afri can mahogany.

Species . .... .. . ..... . ...........
Ki ln r un ..... .... . .. . . . . ... ....
Days in kiln .. .... . .. ... . . . . .. ..
Average per cent moi<ture con·
tent, initial. .. . .. .... . ... ... ..
Average per cent moisturo con·
tent, finaL .... ... ..... . . .....
Por cent visible degrade . . . .. ...

106
<12

107
14

108

21

109
20

66.5

56. 6

70.0

69. 6

9. 9

10.0
2. 0

12.0
1. 0

8.4
1.0

None.

Contra I American mahogany.

wi
21

60.0

I

8.91
2.4 I

162
24

106
42

107

108
21

109
20

164

14

13

165
25

60.3

66.5

56.5

70. 0

69. 6

41. 0

48.7

8.6
3. 0

9.9

10.0
2.0

12. 0
1.0

8. 4
1. 0

7. 7
2t

8. 4
41

None.

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

65

The material for all runs was approximately 1 inch in thickness.
The material for all n ns except 108 was steamed before drying was commenced, and all
runs except 106 were again steamed from one to four times to relieve casehardening. The
steaming for run 162, however, was to relieve only very slight casehardening.
MECHANICAL RESULTS.

African maho.qany.-A decided gain in improvement was made by all kiln runs over the
previously tested air-dried material in modulus of rupture and maximum drop. Work to maximum load, modulus of elasticity, and maximum crushing strength may all be considered equal
to the average of the air-dried in improvement.
No apparent damage is shown in any kiln rlll, and the material is considered to have made
at least as good improvement as would have resulted from air drying.
Central American mahogany.-Material from all the kiln r ns hows very good improvement in strength properties Over the corresponding green material. Improvement ratios are
in nearly every case as high as resulted from the air drying of material previously tested.
There appeal's to be but very little difference in the improvement for the various strength
properties produced by the different processes of drying.
DISCUSSION AND CO, 'CLUSIONS .

The satisfactory results from these kiln runs indicate that the temperature of both Tables
1 and 2, Specification 20500-A, are safe, as fo ur of the runs were made with temperatures
approximately those called for by Table 1 or 2, and one run subjected the to ck to severer
temperatures.
The consi tent though slight inferiority of the high-temperature run (107) to run 106,
which was made on material from the same trees, indicates a pos ible relation between strength
and temperature used in drying.
Run 162, the material in which was Central American mahogany, \vas made with temperatures closely approximating tho e of Table 1, but the relative humidities were not permitted
to drop below 60 per cent. This run produ ed material, -hich ras in excellent condition for
propeller stock and which was slightly better in improvement of strength properties than
material from the same shipment dried in run 161. While no run was made on African mahogany
using conditions similar to run 162, it is believed, since the two "ood are eemingly losely
related in physical properties, that such a run would produce pra tically the same results.
Special tests taken on this run howed even cros -sectional drying and very slight casehardening. These results indicate that the condition under which the material in run 162 was dried
is very satisfactory for drying propeller stock.
RECOMMENDATIO

s.

It is recommended that in drying Central American and African mahoganies, the temperatures of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A be used, but that the relative humidity be not allowed
to drop below 60 per cent at any time during the run.
BLACK WALNUT.

In order to develop a proce s of kiln drying black walnut sati factorily, two kiln runs were
made, one in accordance with Table 1 and the other in accordance with Table 2 of perification 20500-A.
The Table 1 run consisted of I-inch and the Table 2 of both 1 and 2 inch tock.
The Table 2 run was controlled by both 1 and 2 inch samples, which delayed the drying
process slightly as the 2-inch material dried very slowly. The ~-inch samples were discarded
from calculations during the last stages of the run and 'onditions better adapted to I-inch
stock were secmed. The material was steamed at 120 0 F. for six hours at the beginning and for
one hour at 150 0 F. at the end of the run, the latter to relieve casehardening.

66

ANNUAL REPORT

ATIO AL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

The 1-inch material dried from an average of 72 to an average of 8 per cent in a period of
38 days, but 2-inch material in the same period reduced only to 18.per cent from 54 per cent.
The material entered the kiln with end and heart checks, heart rot, and springing, and came out
with an average degrade of about 7 per cent caused by springing, checking, and warping.
The condition of the second run during the final tages was slightly milder than required
by Table 1 of Specification 20500-A. The material wa frozen when loaded into the kiln and
it was necessary to thaw it out, by steaming, before drying could begin. Toward the end of
the run it was necessary to steam the material one hour at 150 0 F . to relieve casehardening.
At the beginning of the run the stock contained an average moisture content of 78.6 per
cent, which was reduced to 7.7 per cent in 31 days. It left the kiln in good condition, showing
a visible degrade of about 2t per cent caused by end checking.
CONCLUSIONS.

The improvement r atios show that, with exception of drop in impact bending, both kiln
runs produced greater improvement in strength properties than resulted in the case of the
previously air-dried material, and in all probability as good results as would have been obtained
by ail' drying the same material. As both runs follow closely Tables 1 and 2 of the specification,
it follows that either of these tabl can be expected to give satisfactory results when used for
drying 1-inch black walnut. The strength data give no basis for a choice between the two kiln
runs.
RECOMMEND ATION .

The work so far done gives, of course, no basis for judging the eff ct of conditions more
severe than Table 1. Until the elrect of more severe conditions can be ascertained, it is recommended that Table 1 of Specification 20500-A be used for drying black walnut.
SUGAR MAPLE.

Seven experimental kiln runs in the drying of sugar maple have been made, but only the first
three, 132, 133, and 134, have reached a stage where discu sion and analysis are possible and
figures are available.
The fil'st run (132) was on 1-inch material only; the last two runs (133 and 134) were on both
1-inch and 2-inch mn,terial. Run 132 was made to determine the effect of a practically constant
temperature of 170 0 F. and the same relative humidities as called for by Table 2 of Specification
20500-A; run 133 was in accordance with Table 1, and run 134 was in accordance with Table 2
of this specification. Runs 133 and 134 were both steamed near the end of the run to relieve
casehardening. N steaming wa necessary on run 132.
The high-temperature run (132) was made in Lhe least time, requiring 12 days, but had the
smallest difference between initial and final moisture contents, the initial moisture pontent
being 48 and the final per cent. This run had the large t average degrade-about 15 per cent.
The degrade was due chiefly t o warping, with some springing and twisting. Slight casehardening
was evident on resawing.
The Table 1 run (133) required 23 days, practically twice the time of the previous run, but
reduced the average moisture content from 56 to 5.8 per cent, with an average degrade of 11
per cent du e to cupping, warping, and springing, the gr ater portion being due to cupping. Very
little casehardening developed on resawing.
Kiln run 134 required 29 days to reduce the average moisture content from 56 to 7.5 per
cent, but had the smallest degrade of any run-about per cent, due to cupping and warping.
The material showed very slight reverse casehardening on being resawed.
RESULTS.

There is no marked or consistent difference in the mechanical results of the three runs.
The kiln-dried material showed improvement over matched green material equal or superior to
that pr eviously obtained by an' drying.

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

67

CONCLUSIONS.

Absolu tely definite conclusions can not be reached until tests on cOlTesponding air-dried
material have been made; but the data warrant the conclusions:
1. That kiln drying can be carried on without injury of material, and probably with better
results than can be obtained by air drying.
2. That there are no consistent differences in the effects of the three run. This indicate
that a considerable range of temperature can be employed with little, if any, difference in the
effect on the mechanical propertie .
lECOMMENDATlONS.

Until the above conclusion (No.2) has been checked by te ts on corresponding air-dried
material, and because of the greater danger of damage through accidental departure from
schedules when operating at higher temperatures, it is recommended that maple be dried by
schedule of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A.
YELLOW BIRCH.

Five kiln runs have been made on yellow birch, a follows:
Run 84 was on 2~-inch plank, with temperatures 130° F. initial to 180° F. final, initial and
final humidities of about 77 and 13 per cent, 1'e pectively. The average moi ture content wa
reduced from 60 to 4 per cent in about 31 days. There was evidence of casehardening in some
parts of the pile at the end of the run.
Run 168 was on I-inch stock. Temperatures were approximately those of Table 1. Initial
and final humidities were about 80 and 35 per cent, Tespectively. Tho material was steamed
six: times, at temperatmes vary-ing fTom 150° to 165° F. and periods of one-fourth to Olle hour,
fOT the relief of casehardening, which persistently developed. There wa slight casehardening
at the end of the run. Uneven sawing, which prevented proper piling and weighting of the stock,
was chiefly responsible for the degrade of about 10 per cent. Moisture content was reduced
from 64 to 7.6 per cent in 16 days.
Run 169 was on I-inch stock. Kiln conditions were approximately those of Table 1,
Specification 20500-A. Steaming three time, at 160°, 170°, and 160° F . for three hours, two
hours, and two hours, respectively, near the end of the run, left part of the stock everely casehardened and part in a condition of severely Tever ed casehardening. Degrade wa about the
same as in run 168 and due to the same causes. Moisture content was reduced from 5 to 8
per cent in 17 days.
Run 170 was on I-inch stock, with kiln conditions approximately as prescribed by Table 2
of Specification 20500-A. Five steamings were made at about 20° F. above the acheduled drying temperatures. The stock wa practically free !Tom casehardening at the close of the run.
Degrade of about 7.5 per cent resulted from the same causes as in run 16. Moistme content
was reduced from about 65 to 8.2 per cent in 31 days.
Run 203 was made on I -inch partially air-dried stock. Kiln conditions were approximately
those of Table 1. Steaming for one hour at 160° F . on the eighth day and for two hours at 170°
F . on the tenth day successfully relieved the ca ehardening which had developed. The moisture
content was reduced from 18.5 to about 7 per cent in 10 days. There was about 5 per cent
degrade.
MECHANICAL RESULTS.

Comparisons by means of improvement ratios indicate that run 16, 169, and 170 produced practically equal improvement, and that thi improvement is equal to the average of
two trees previously air dried, being les than one and greater than the other. Imprqvement
in run 84 is less than the minimum for the previously air-dried materiaL Comparisons of run
203 with the others are di{fLcult to make because of the partially air-dried condition of the stocl
before it was placed in the kiln.

68

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
CONCLUSIO •

The kiln conditions of Tables 1 and 2 produced re ults in the drying of yellow birch which
are equal to those to be expected from air drying.
It; seems probable that the one run at temperatures of 130 0 to 180 0 F. has failed to produce
as good results as would have been obtained from air drying.
RECOMMENDATIONS.

Both Table 1 and Table 2 of Specification 20500-A are recommended a.s suitable for the
drying of yellow birch.
OAK.

Seven kiln runs were made on oaks, including red and white oak species frOID the South and
white oak (presumably true white (Quercus alba» from northern Indiana. The testing work,
inclusive of tests on air-dried material, h as been entirely completed. The data, however, are
very erratic and it is difficult to arrive at consistent conclusions.
One run (A), at temperatures varying from 150 0 to 165 0 F. and relative humidities from
85 to 60 per cent, produced very good resul ts from the strength standpoint on southern red
and white oak species, with the exception of Spanish oak. The charge was steamed for one
hour and two hours at temperatures of 179 0 and 170 0 F ., respectively, to relieve casehardening
stresses. However, this rtm r esulted in a degrade of 60 per cent as determined from inspection
before and after kiln cll'ying. The causes of degrade included severe casehardening, warping,
cupping, honeycombing, and collapse.
Two runs (B and C) on northern white oak gave entirely satisfactory results from the
strength standpoint. Run B was with temperatures approximately as prescribed in Table 2
of Specification 20500-A and relative humidities ranging between 90 and 70 per cent. This run
was steamed at 135 0 F. for one hour to relieve casehardening stresses. Run C was at temperatures
of 120 0 F. initial and 140 0 F. final, with relative humidities about 90 initial and 50 final. It was
necessary to steam this material three times, at temperatures from 160 0 to 164 0 F., for a total of
two and one-half hours, to relieve casehardening stresses at the end of the run. Both gave
results fully equal to air dry, with the lower temperature run (B) slightly the better. Material
in both cases came from the kiln in excellent condition, there being less than 1 per cent degrade
in run B and less than 1 ~ per cent in run C.
In another run(D), with temperature 90 0 F. ini tial to about 125°F. final and humidities ranging from SAturation down to 40 per cent, northern white oak came from the kiln with about 1
per cent degrade, r esulting from springing and warping. At the close of the run the charge
F.
was steamed seven hours at 155 O to relieve the casehardening stresse. Strength tests indicated
that this material ras slightly deficien t in strength properties as compared to matched airdried material.
Still another run (E), with initial temperature of about 100 0 F. to final 130 0 F. and humidities
ranging from saturation to about 45 per cent, resulted in about 7} per cent degrade. The material was steamed twice at 185 0 and 170 0 F. to kill mold and mildew. A final steaming at 180 0 F.
was to relieve casehardening stresses. This run, however, included southern red oak and both
northern and southern white oaks, and while the different species were not separately graded,
it was observed that the degrade was more serious in the red than in the white oak. Thenorthern
white oak from this run was also slightly deficient in strength properties as compared to matched
air-dried stock.
Southern white oak was includ'e d in runs A and E , as above described. Run A produced
quite satisfactory results from the strength standpoint., while run E resulted in a considerable
loss of strength as compared t.o air-dried material.
Two addit.ional runs, F and G, included southern white oak. Run F was made with temperatures of 105 0 F . initial and about 135 0 F. final and relative humidities 85 initial to about 40
per cent final-approximately the condition of Table 2. Run G was with temperatures of 120 0 F.
initial to about 140 0 F. final and with humidities as in F. These runs included also southern red

EFFECT OF KILN DRYING ON STRENGTH OF AIRPLANE WOODS.

69

oak species. Run F was steamed three times for periods of one hour each, at 155 0 F., to relieve
casehardening stresses. The degrade in run F was 12 per cent, from warping, springing, and
cupping; while G resulted in 50 per cent degrade from springing, warping, cupping, checking,
twisting, collapse, honeycombing, and casehardening. Run G was steamed on three occasions
for periods of one-half hour, at temperatures of 150 0 to 170 0 F., to relieve casehardening stresses.
Run F gave quite satisfactory results from the strength standpoint, while in G the results were
unsatisfactory, there being a loss of 25 to 30 per cent in modulus of rupture, work to maximum
load, and height of drop in impact. Exclusive of Spanish oak, the results from the strength
standpoint were as follows:
Southern red oaks, including Spanish oak, were dried in runs A, E, F, and G. Run F produced approximately as good material as air dry, run G material considerably inferior to air dry,
and run E, as indicated by maximum drop in impact and maximum crushing strength in compression parallel (there being no static bending tests), material very much inferior to matched
air-dried stock.
None of these runs (A, E, F, and G) gave satisfactory results from the strength standpoint on Spanish oak. Runs F and G resulted in losses in all strength properties, with F possibly
slightly superior to G. Run A gave results somewhat superior to either F or G, while the results
in E were inferior to either F or G.
From the results as presented above it is concluded: (1) That under the same kiln conditions
northern white oak can be expected to dry with smaller losses, both from the strength standpoint
and the standpoint of degrade in appearance, than southern oaks, either red or white; (2)
that of the southern oaks thered oak species require more care than the white oak species ; (3)
that Spanish oak is considerably more liable to damage of strength properities in kiln drying
than the other red oak species from the southern region; (4) that, in general, the northern oaks
are more easily kiln dried than the southern.
It is evident from experience in these runs, and the conclusion is borne out by experience
in drying oak on a commercial scale, that the maintenance of suitable kiln conditions requires
more care in the case of oaks than in other species or groups of species. Oak has been found in
all experimentation with it, as well as in its utilization, to be morevariable than other species. To
attempt to specify beforehand exactly what kiln condition should be used seems unwise. The
results of these kiln-drying and strength tests indicate that the temperatures of Table 1 of Specification 20500-A are probably the maximum which are safe for northern white oak, and likewise
that the temperatures of Table 2 should not be exceeded in drying southern oak, either red or
white. In drying any of the oaks very careful attention must be given to the condition of the
stock in all parts of the kiln. Temperatures and humidities must be regulated not only by the
moisture content of the stock but also by its condition with respect to checking, casehardening,
the existence of a difference in moisture content between the outside and the inside of the piece,
and the existence of stressed conditions.

o

