/-’-

REPORT NO.67

.

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF
AIRCRAFT WOODS

NATXONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
FOB AERONAUTICS

PREPBINT FROM FIFTH ANNUAL BEPOBT

V

WASEXNGTON
GOVERNMENT PBMTMG OFRICE
1320

i

/
I

,

i

REPORT No. 67
SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS
COMPILED BY

W. N. SPARHAWK, Forest EIaminer, Forest Service
U. S. Department of Agriculture

3

.

.

CONTENTS

Introductory.............................................................................................
Sitka spruce.............................................................................................
Eastern s ruce...........................................................................................
*ouglw tf: ...............................................................................................
Port Orford cedar........................................................................................
True firs ................................................................................................
White pine ..............................................................................................
Western white pine .....................................................................................
Sugar pine...............................................................................................
W s e n hemlock........................................................................................
etr
Redwood...................................................................................................
Bald cyprm ............................................................................................
Aah .....................................................................................................
Basswood.. .................. ....................................................................................
Beech..............................................................................................................
Birch....................................................................................................
Black cherry............................................................................................
-.$

Em
!

.....................................................................................................

Hrckory...................................................................................................
Su maple
o a r ...................................................................................................
Yellow poplar...........................................................................................
Black walnut............................................................................................
Cottonwood.............................................................................................
Redgurn ................................................................................................
Mahogany................................................................................................
Spanish cedar............................................
.........................................

............................................................................................

5

.

Pape

7
7
10
12
14
16
18
21
23
25
27
29
29
33
35
37
40 .

40
43
45
48
51
53
57
58
60
61

REPORT No. 67
SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT
By W. N. SPARHAWK.

WOODS

INTRODUCTORY.

’

-

The purpose of this report is to present in brief form such information as is available
regarding the supplies of the kin& of wood that have been used or seem likely to become
important in the construction of airplanes, and the amount of lumber of each species normally
put on the market each year. A general statement is given of the uses to which each kind of
wood is or may be put, but no attempt has been made to go into a technical discussion of these
various uses.
The information herein contained has been compiled from a great many sources, including
rincipally published and unpublished reports by various members of the Forest Service.
bany of the figures given, particularly those relatmg to amounts of standing timber, are only
crude estimates, but until we have a census of the forest resources of the country we shall have
to depend largely on guesswork. The figures on production of lumber are taken from the
annual lumber census reports and may be relied upon. Estimates as to the proportions of the
total lumber production of different s ecies that may be suitable for the manufacture of aircraft are necessarily very general, an$ are open to modification as methods of sawing or as
airplane s ecifications change;
I t is gelieved that all the species used to any extent or approved for use in American aircraft are included. However, specifications in all probability will be cha ed as the industry
develops. Consequently, the use of many kinds of woods not now consi ered suitable may
eventually be allowed.
Statements regardin the uses of the different woods are included in order to ive an idea
of the industries with w ich aircraft manufacturers will have to compete for t eir lumber
supplies. Tbe @res ublished were obtained several years ago and hence may not exactly
represent present con itions, since the annual production of lumber of many of the species
has changed considerably in the interval.
The maps that accompany the text show by dots the approximate locations of the mills
that in 1917 produced the largest amounts of the lumber of most of the species covered.
These maps, therefore, indicate in a general way the sources of commercial supplies of the
various species.

3

%

%

d!

SlTM SPRUCE.
(Picea sitchewis.)

This species is ala0 known as tideland spruce and w s e n spruce.
etr

DISTRIBUTION.

Sitka spruce occurs in a strip along the Pacific coast from northern California to Alaska.
On1 -along a few of the larger valleys does it extend more than 40 miles inland. The bulk
of t e @and of high-grade spruce is in Clallam, Jefferson, Grays Harbor, and Pacific Counties,
Wash., and in Clatsop, Tillamook, Lincoln, Douglas, Coos, and Lane Counties, Oreg.

K

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Spruce is the wood par excellence far the construction of aircraft. It is light and has
greater strength than other woods of similar weight. It is stiff, has a considerable degree of
tou hness, and can be worked with ease. These properties have made it the most generally
use! wood for win beams. and struts, and large quantities are em loyed for longerons, ribs,
and lywood. Altiou h there is no great differerm in the strengti roperties of red, white,
and gitka spruce, the atter species on account of its greater size anfconsequently its larger
roportion of clear lumber, is a more importan! source of aircraft material than the other two,
Eecause of this and the large supplies of VI.%$ timber-still remaining, Sitka s ruce will probably
for many years be a very important species in the alrcraft industry, notwitfistanding the fact
that the supply is so far away from centers of manufacture.

B

7

8

A'NXWAL BEPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

SUPPLIES BND PRODUCTION OF AIBCRILFT WOODS.

9

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Sitka spruce does not occur in pure stands over considerable areas, but grows in mixture
with Douglas f western hemlock, grand fir, western red cedar, and associated species. It
%
,
constitutes from 12 to 40 per cent, and occasionally an even greater proportion, of the stand
on much of the land where it is found, with an average of about 20 per cent. The trees reach
diameters of from 12 to 15 feet and heights up to 200 feet. Average mature trees are between
4 and 6 feet in diameter and contain from 10 to 15 thousand feet of lumber.
The total stand of Sitka spruce in Washington and Oregon is nearly 11 billion board feet,'
of which 6,100 million feet is in the four Washington counties named above, 4,375 million
feet in Oregon, and 475 million feet in other counties of western Washington. Except for
about 600 million feet on the Queniult Indian Reservation, 950 million feet on the Olympic
National Forest, and 700 million feet of State timber, all of which is in Washington, and 300
million feet on the Siuslaw National Forest, in Oregon, the spruqe is privately owned, most of
it by large timber and logging companies.
Almost all of the Government timber is a t resent inaccessible. One-third of the privately
owned timber is scattered, inaccessible, or too7ow a ade to be important as a source of airplane material; 23 billion feet is in large bodies whic can be reached only by extensive road
and railroad construction, and about 4 billion feet is fairly accessible to existing plants. The
eater part of the spruce forests is in the more easily logged portions of the region, on the
Ewlands or in the lower foothills.
There is estimated to be from 15 to 18 billion feet of Sitka s ruce in Alaska, practically
all on National Forests, but only about 1 billion feet of this is woo$ enough in quality to yield
lane lumber. There is also estimated to be about 29 bihon feet 111 British Columbia,
a?
pro ably not of the highest quality.

f?

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER

The average annual cut of Sitka spruce lumber from 1913 to 1917 was 285 million board
feet, of which three-fourths was cut in Washington. In 1917, 14 mills reported cuts of more
than 10 million feet of spruce each, while about 30 mills cut from 1 to 10 million feet each.
Small mills play a very unimportant part in the production of Sitka spruce.
Under normal conditions spruce is logved with other species as it comes in the stand.
With the urgent demand for spruce duri 0 &e war, however, the principle of selective logging
waa developed very generally, and s ec& effort was made to get more spruce, and partiaulady higher-grade spruce: than wo d normally have been obtained.. Because of the lar e
size of the timber and the heavy stands, steam logginu is in general practice, although in t i e
selective logging animals were used to some extent. %lotor trucks were used in addition to
the logging rdilroads and water trans ortation in bringing logs to the mius. Logging operations in the spruce region are carrieaon throughout the year. In this region much of the
timber is cut by logging companies that do not operate sawmills, but sell their logs to sawmills.
Most mills saw logs of all species; a few specialize on spruce. Mills in the s Puce region have
a capacity considerably in excess of their normal total cut of all species. Pntil the demand
for straight-grained material for airplanes developed during the past fciv years, no special
effort had been made to saw that kind of lumbcr. The urgent demand for airplane material
during the war led to. improved methods of sawing, which made it possible to get the maximum
Amount of strai ht-grained lumber out of the logs.
Of the 7 bilfion feet which will yield airplane lumber, it is estimated that 20 per cent will
ade No. 1 logs, 40 per cent No. 2. and 40 per cent No. 3. No. 1 and No. 2 logs should cut
Kom 15 to 18 per cent of wing beam stock, and it is estimated that on the average the available mature spruce will yield between 10 and 15 per cent of wing-beam material. Of the total
stand of Sitka spruce, probably between 7 and 10 per cent will bc suitable for wing beams.

2

MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

Sitka spruce is used for about the same purposes as the other spruces. Forty per cent
of the cut of spruce lumber of the United States is normally used for construction and other
purposes without further manufacture. Sixty per cent is manufactured into a large variety
of products. Planing min products consume 26 per cent. The box and crate industry, w h L
uses mostly the lower grades of lumber, t a k y 25 per cent, Musical instruments, which require
the best material, especially for piano soundlng boards, use 2.2 per cent. Woodenware employs
2.1 per cent, and many other industries use smaller quantities.
I

It is estimated that about 1,600 million board feet of the most accessible Sitka s p ~ c has been cut since this estimate WJS made.
e

135572-19---2

.

.

10

ANRUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AFJtONAUTICS.

Much of the high-grade Sitka spruce lumber is normally shi ped east to the Central States,
and construction material of this species has very recent1 gegun to enter Atlantic coast
markets in competition with eastern spruce. Shipments to &reign countries and to California
markets usually go by water. Eastern shi ments have gone by rail, but under normal conditions Atlantic coast shipments will probahy take the water route.

EASTERN SPRUCE.
8

RED SPRUCE (Pica tubem). WHITE SPRUCE (Piwa mnadrnsi8).

Pica canaden& is a h known 88 cat spruce, bog SpNm, and skunk qruce.
DISTRIBUTION.

Red spruce occurs from Prince Edward's Island, along the St. Lawrence Valley to central
New York and Massachusetts, and along the mountains as far south as South Carolma. White
spruce is found in northern New England, the Lake States, the Black Hills of South Dakota,
and Montana, and extends far to the north in Canada and Alaska. In the United States, red
s ruce is commercid important in northern Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, and in
tge southern Appalac 'ans from West Virginia southward. White spruce is important chiefly
in the northern part of the Lake States.

i

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Red and white s ruce, with Sitka spruce, are the ideal woods for the structural parts of
aircraft, because in &em lightness and ease of working are combined with r a ! strength,
stiffness, and freedom from hidden defects. The three species do not greatl d er in strength
properties, but Sitka spruce- reaches much larger sizes and, therefore, proJuces a larger proortion of clear lumber suitable for aircraft. Spruce is used for wing beams, ribs, struts,
fongerons, lywood, and, indeed, for almost every wooden part of aircraft. Even though its
place may e taken to some extent by other woods ?-the supply of virgin spruce dwindles,
I t will undoubtedly continue to be a very important slrcraft material so long as wood is used
for these purposes.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

B

Spruce o c c m at medium or high elevations, and in the northe& part of its range it occupies lowlands also. In many places it forms extensive, pure or nearly pure, dense stands,
especidy in the more mountainous parts of ita ra
In other places it is found in mixed
stands, with northern hardwoods (birch, maple, b e 3 ; a n d ash), as well as balsam, hemlock,
tamarack, arbor vitae, or even white and Norway pines. Over lar e areas, spruce makes up
from half to three-fourths of the total stand. In the southern Appt$achians spruce is confined
to the higher mountains. The southern Appalachian section was not opened up until a comparatively recent date, but the spruce stands there are now bein tapped-by railroads and
most of the better-grade spruce d l soon be accessible to mills. T i e s ruce in the Northeast
must be transported to the mills principally on drivable streams. Altiough the topography
of the region IS such that the greater part of the lumber is accessible to such streams, still
certain large areas are somewhat out of the way.
The northeastern spruce does not reach large size. While diameters of from 2 to 3 feet
are not uncommon, a great many of the trees in mature stands have diameters between 12
and 18 inches. The southern spruce averages considerably larger than that of.the North. It
is doubtful whether the Lake States spruce will be used to a large degree for airplane lumber.
The roportion of clear material produced is not large, and much of it is in short lengths.
%e total stand of spruce saw timber in the eastqp United States, excluding the Lake
States, is approximately 143 billion board feet. This estimate does not include trees less than
10 inches in diameter, and in some States does not include those less than 12 inches. Xai.ne
has approximately 74 billion feet, New Ham shire 2 billion, Vermont 200 million, New York
between 33 and 4 billion, North Carolina and ennessee 950 million, West Virginia. and Virginia
390 million. Practically all of the old- owth spruce, as well as a large part of the second
growth, is owned in large units by land, umber, or pulp companies.

4

!?

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

During the years 1913 to 1917, the average annual cut of spruce lumber in the Northeast
and the southern Appalachians was a little less than 725 million board feet, of which 360 million
was sawed in Maine, 65 million in Vermont, 70 million in New Hampshire, 25 million in Mmsachusetts, 45 million in New York, 105 million in West Virginia, and 50 million in North Car+

1

/

SUPPLIES AND PBODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.

11

#

12

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMXITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

lina. While there is considerable fluctuation in the lumber cut from year to year, due part1
to labor and weather conditions and partly to variation 1 ~ the demand for spruce pulpwoo%,
.
the eneral trend indicates a reduction in the cut of spruce lumber.
%or the ear 1917,14 mills in Maine, 5 in West Vrrginia74 in North Carolina, and 1 each in
New Ham &e7 Vermont, and New York reported cuts of between 5 and 25 million feet of
spruce, a! 1 mill in Maine and 1 in West Virginia reported more than 25 million feet. About
n
90 mills, most of them in Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, cut between 500 thousand
and 5 million board feet. While most of the spruce mills cut lumber of other s ecies, spruce
forms the major art of the cut of most of the larger mills. Existing mills, if t ey were run
to ca acity, c o d s a w from t h e e to five times aa much spruce as they now cut.
fn the Northeast, most of the lo ging is done in winter. Logs are hauled out to drivable
streams by animals or steam log ha ers. In the South operations are carried on throughout
the year. In this region, both steam and animal logging is carried on, and logs are transported
to the mills by railroad. Most operators cut spruce both for lumber and for pulp. Many of
them saw only the best logs into lumber and let the small and inferior material go into pulp.
During the past few years nearly all of the mil1 operators that cut any considerable quantity
of spruce lumber have become familiar with the character of material required for aircraft and
with the best methods of sawing it.
It is-atimated that about 3 4 per cent of the spruce in Maine (12 inches in diameter and
.
u ward) will be suitable for airplane construction. Slightly more than 6 per cent of the New
&mpshire and Vermont s ruce, a little less than 6 er cent of that in New York, and from 8
to 8.2 per cent of that in t e southern mountains w& be suitable for airplanes. These figures
do not in all cases represent what is being produced at the present time, Pecause in some
instances mills are now cutting material from the choicest parts of their tracts.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.
Spruce lumber is used in large quantities for eneral construction purposes and by industries manufacturing wooden products. As is state in the chapter on Sitka spruce, these industries use 60 er cent of the spruce lumber cut in the United States. High-grade spruce lumber
is in great emand for piano sounding boards, for clapboards, and similar uses, and in sholter
lengths for butter tubs. Eastern s ruce is marketed most1 in the North and East and, comequently, does not have to cam geavy transportation c arges. On account of the higher
value of spruce stumpage in the ]East, together with such other factors as the larger percentage
of upper grades sawed from Sitka spruce, the spruce from the Northwest is now competing
with the native lumber even on the New England market.
Some 10 to 15 million feet of eastern spruce lumber is exported in normal times, chiefly
to the countries of western Europe.
DOUGLAS FIR

-

R

9

!
i

8

-

3

K

(Peeudo~a
laziflia.)

T i species is also known aa red fir, yellow fir, Oregon pine, red pine, and Douglas spruce.
hs
DISTRIBUTION.

Douglas fir occurs through most of the forests from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific
coast, and from Mexico to central British Columbia. Only the stands west of the Cascade
Range, from northern California to British Columbia, contain any considerable proportion of
material suitable for aircraft construction, and, therefore, only the fir from this region 1s covered
in the following discussion.
USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Douglas fir is a very satisfactory substitute for spruce in making wing beams, longerons,
struts, and engine bearers, and has been so used to a considerable extent. While somewhat
heavier than spruce, and more liable to check and shake during manufacture and in service,
in its stren th pro erties it is equal or superior to spruce of the same sizes. The enormous
supply ava’ able, t e la1 e proportion of hgh-grade material, and the high degree of development reached by the lm%er industry in the Douglas f r region make this species an important
i
ymrce of airplane material.

shp

SUPPLY UF TIMBER.

Douglas fir is the predominant tree through most of the forest area west of the Cascade
Range in Oregon and Washington, and in many places it covers extensive areas practically
to the exclusion of other species. I t forms very heavy stands, averaging from 30 to 60 thousand
board feet per acre over large tracts, and reaches large sizes. The trees in virgin stands average

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.

13

e,
-4

E

14

AIYNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISOBP- COEdMITTEE FOR A E R O N A ~ C S .

from 3 to 6 feet in diameter and from 150 to 200 feet in height, and man are much
While the species grows from sea-level up to 6,000 feet elevation, the Stan s of better
that will yield a fair proportion of aircraft material are mostly below 3,000 feet and
obstacles to logging operations. Large bodies of timber are accessible to existing mills and
others will be opened up as they are needed. The stand of Douglas fir timber in the region
under consideration is estimated at approxunately 600 billion board feet, of which 60 er cent
is in Oregon and 40 per cent in Washgton. Of this, 100 billion feet is on the nationa fares@,
30 billion on State and Indian lands, and 470 billion in priyate holdings, for the most part IR
large tracts.

B

P

.PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

.

The annual cut of Do laa fir Iumber in the United States, from 1913 to 1917, inclusive,
has averaged 5,150 millioaoard feeti and i steadily inmetsing. The southern yellow pine
s
forests, which n3w furnish the eat bulk of the-country's construction material, have passed
the crest of their production, an the Douglas fir region will soon be c d e d upon for an increasing
d
production to f the gap. Ninety-five per cent of the cut comes from Oregon and Washington,
and more than 80 per cent of this, or approximately 4 billion feet, from west of the Cascades.
A l but a corn aratively i n s i i c a n t part of this C produced by large, weIl-equipped, up-to-date
l
mills, of whicg there are about 180. Their rated capacity on a one-shift bas= 18 between 9 and
10 billion board feet a year or, allowing for other species cut along with the fir, about double
their resent out ut.
&cause of ! t 1ar-e sizes of the timber, steam logging and railroad hauls are the rule.
e
Logs are ordinarily cut %om 32 to 40 feet long. Stands are generally cut clear of all merchantable material, taking all species as they come. Operations are continued throughout the year.
companies have no mill connections but sell their logs to sawmills.
Many er normal conditions no particular effort is made to saw out straight-grained lumber.
Un
The demand for such material during the past two years led to the development of methods
for producing it, and these will no doubt be continued and improved upon if the demand
continues.
Under present standards most of the airplane material W come from the grades No. 2
dear and better. The percentage of the- cut in these grades varies with different stands, but
for the region averages about 20 per cent. It is estimated that half of this lumber will not be
suitable for aircraft, on account of low density, itch ockets, and a little spiral vain. The
other half, or 10 per cent of the total cut of 4 b&on L t , should be suitable for amraft, and
probably 60 per cent of that, or 6 per cent of the total cut, will meet present standards for
wing beams.
W K E T S AM) USES FOR THE LUMBER

f

Of the total cut of Douglas fir lumber, ap roximately 45 per cent, including most of the
better-grade material, is further rnanufacturebi The greater part, 40 per cent of the cut,
goes into flooring, interior finish, sash and doors, and other lanin mill products. Between
15 and 20 per cent of all wood used for these purposes in the b&mfStates is Douglas fir. Of
the total cut, 1.8 per cent goes into tanks and silos, 1.7 per cent into cars, and 0.9 per cent into
ships and boats. Considerable quantities are used for pumps and ipe, furniture, boxes and
crates, fixtures, paving, rollers, agricultural implements, and woodp
enware.
Douglas tlr IS being sold in increasing quantities in the eastern United States. I t has
for a number of years been exported in considerable quantities to South America, China, and
Australia, and to a very Iirnited extent to European countries.
PORT ORFORD CEDAR.
(Chameqparia Iazosoniana.)

.
-

!Chis species k a q known aa Lawaon cyprm, Oregon cedar, and white cedar.
Lo

DISTRIBUTION.

Stands of Port Orford cedar of commercial importance are confined to a strip from 20 to 25
n
miles wide along the PacSc coast I Coos and Curr Counties, Ore
Scattaed individuals are
reported ta far south as the Klamath Rive. and
t
Shasta, in Cakornia.

d.

USE IN AIRCRAFT.
while somewhat h e a ~ e than Sitka spruce, Port Orford cedar is equal or supeiior to spruce
r
in all its strength roperties, and has been successfully used as a substitute for sprucct in making
wing beams and or other uses to which spruce is adapted. While this species is satisfactory
for aircraft use, the limited sup ly and small annual output indicate that i t will probably not
play a very important part inet future development of the airplane industry.
!

E

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCXAFT WOODS.

.

-

15

16

dmNUdL REPORT NATIONAL AD,VISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAOTICS.

SUPPLY OF TIMBE&

Port Orford cedar does not grow in pure stands; but is scattered through forests of Douglas
f i ~ hemlock, alrand fir, and western red cedar. It usually comprises from 25 to 30 per cent of
,
the stand. frees of this species reach very large size. Practically all of the stanc@g Port
il.
Orford cedar is virgin timber, and fairly accessiole to existing m l s The stand is estmated
a t about 750 million feet, of which 250 million feet is on the Slskiyou National Forest, and the
remaining 500 million feet., about equally divided between Coos and Curry Counties, is privately owned. Most of thm is in the hands of a small number of large firms.
PBODUCTXON OF LUMBER.

The total cut of Port Orford cedar in 1917 was about 35 million board feet, which is probably
about the average annual production. The bulk of it is cut by one firm and only four mills cut
more than one million feet each. Cedar is ordinad cut as it comes in the stand, and makes u
about 28 per cent of the tbtal cut of themills. whic produce it. Existin plants, if run to fu 1
capacity on a one-shift basis, could cut approximately 25 per cent more t an they did in 1917.
Logging is by steam, and log lengths of from 32 to 40 feet are commonly cut. During the
drive for wing-beam material for the war, sawing methods adapted to the maximum roduction
of straighbgrained material were used; but, smce straightness of grain is not one o the main
considerations in cutting lamber for most commercial uses, it is possible that no special effort
eclill be made to produce that kind of material in the future.
About 20 per cent of thecut falls in theclear grades (No. 1 and No. 2), andit is estimated that
60 er cent of this or 12 per cent of the total cut, is of airplane grade. The other 40 per cent
w i be disqualified on account of low density, spiral grain, or other defects.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.
The upper grades of Port Orford cedar are used for interior finish, caskets, and boat building. The lower grades go into general construction. Much of the output is normally used on
the Pacific coast, and some is exported to Japan.

K

P

%

P

3

FIR.
GRAND FIR (Abiesgradk).
ThL*epecieeis also known aa lowland white fir, white fir, Oregon white fir, and silver fir.
SILVER FIR (Abies ambizis).
Thia apeciea ia also known aa lovely fir, amabilia fir, red fir, red silver fir, and larch.

NOBLE FIR (-4bka nobilk).
Thie species is also known aa larch, and red fir.
0

WBITE FIR (Abies cornlor).
This species is also known 88 California white fir, Colorado white fir, balsam,and silver fir.
DISTRIBUTION.

Grand fir occurs along the Pacific coast and along the Cascade ran e from Vancouver
Island to northern California, and extends into northern Idaho and nort western Montana.
Silver .fir occurs on the upper slopes of the Cascade and Coast Ranges from British Columbia
to central Oregon, and is most abundant in the Olympic Mountains of Washington. Noble
fir also occurs on the Coast Ranges of Washington and Oregon, and along the Cascades of northern
Oregon and southern Washin ton. The range of white fir extends from the Rocky Mountains
of southern Colorado to nort ern Oregon, and southward through California to New Mexico,
Arizona, and northern Mexico. It is of large commercial importance only in the Sierra region
of California.

%

f

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Grand fir is somewhat heavier than spruce, but in strength compares favorably with it.
Silver fir is also slightly heavier than spruce, but practically equal to it in most of i b -Irength
properties. Noble fir lighter than spruce, and about as strong. White fir is a little lighter
than spruce, and almost as strong, except in shock resistance. While the firs have not so far
been used to any extent in airplane construction, at least the first three species named may
prove to be fairly satisfactory substitutes for spruce in making wing beams and struts. As far
a present information shows, the other fir3 are not strong enough for such use. Because .of
s
thelr light weight, however, the fir3 are suitable for core work in producing plywood,

SDPPLIES AXD PRODUOTION OF AIWRAFT WOODS.

17

.
135572-1-

.

18

aETNUAL REPORT ‘NATIONAL ADVlSORY COMMITTEE FOB bEBONA’UTICS.

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

The firs usually occur in mixed coniferous forests, although in some situatioM they form
practically ure stands over considerable areas. Associated species in the northwest coast
region are 8ouglas fir, western hemlock, western red cedar, Sitka spruce. In the MontanaIdaho region the stands include western white ine Do las fir, western red cedar, western
s
larch, western yellow pine, western hemlock. &e &ita% in the Sierra region i associated
with western yellow, Jeffre and sugar pines, Douglas fir, red fir, incense cedar, and occasionally
with the bigtree. Grand occurs chiefly a t low and medium elevations, and there it can convenientl be logged along with Douglas fir and its other associates. Siver fir is a tree of the
higher sLpes, and very little of it can be considered accessible under present conditions. The
same is true, but to a somewhat less extent, of noble fir. White fir grows in rough mountain
country, and much of it is hard to get at. It is commonly taken when found on tracts that are
bein cut over primaril for other species.
h e total stand o grand fir is estimated at about 133 billion board feet, of which nearly
5 billion feet is in Washington, 4 billion feet in Oregon, and 43 billion feet in Idaho and Montana.
s
Two-thirds of it j owned by the Government, princi ally on National Forests; the rest is owned
by lumber and hmber companies. It is estimated t l a t there is 35 billion feet of silver fir, and
that 32 billion feet of it is in Washington, owned about half-and-half by the Government and
by rivate com anies. Of the 4 billion feet of noble fir,two-thirds is owned b the Government
anfone-third y private concerns. Three billion feet of it is in Oregon. here is about 35
billion feet of white fir in California, 5 billion feet in Oregon, and possibly 1+billion feet scattered
in other Stateg. About half of it is on the National Forests and the other half is in the hands of
large private owners.

8

9

B

IF

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

this lumber, probably at least 90 per cent of it, is produced by large
incidentally as it comes in the run of logs. Thirty mills report cuts for
aillion feet of fir, and 11 report cuts in excess of 5 million feet.
Steam logging is very general in the fir region, and nearly all o raton use logging railroads.
In the northwest coast regon logs are cut long, while in the nort ern Idaho region and in the
Sierras l6-foot lengths are the d a ,
Since, with the exception of the noble fir, the logs make only relatively low-grade material,
little care is used a t most mills in sawing them up. The ercentage of clear material that can
be obtained varies rather widely in different localities. he best available estimates indicate
that about 1 per cent of the white fir and and fir, from 1 to 2 per cent of the silver fir, and
10 per cent of the noble fir will be suitable
airplane construction.

r

.p

/%

MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

The great bulk of the fr lumber roduced is used in construction work without further mani
ufacture. The best material is ma e into flooring, sash, doors, interior finish, and shelving.
The box and crate industry uses a small percentage of the output. While some fir lumber may
reach eastern markets alon with shipments of Douglas fir and western pine, by far the greater
part of it is used in the d s t .
. WHITE PINE.

B

(Pinus strobus. )

Thia species is also known a Weymouth pine, northern pine, spruce pine, and soft pine.
s
DISTRIBUTI~N.

White pine occurs from Newfoundland to Lake Winnipeg, and southward through the

Lake States, the New England States, and i the Appalachians as far south as northern Georgia.
n

SuPpLlES A X D PBODUCTION

OF dIBCRAF'J! WOODS.

19

20

-NU&

REPORT NATIONAL AJXTSOBY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Although somewhat softer, less shock-resistant, and less stiff than spruce, -white pine
is comparatively strong and light, u d o r m in structure, easy to dry. and work, and stays in
place well. It is a falrly satisfacto substitute for spruce in makm wing beams and for
other uses, and has been so emplo
Because of its lightness, it ma es excellent cores for
plpood. Norway (or red) pine (&nus resinosu), which is cut and marketed along with white
pine in the northern part of therange, may also-be used-as a spruce substitute.
The remaining supply of v w p white pme IS fast +appea$ng;.and, since very little Wing
beam material can be obtained from second-growth, thls species d not long continue to be
an important airplane wood, except possibly for plywood.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER
Pure stands of white pine or mixed stands of white and Norway pine still cover extensive
areas in Minnesota. Other areas are covered with mixed stands of pine, hardwoods, and hemlock, in which ine may or may not be the predormnant s ecies. There are practically no mrgin
region is now in small tracts, mmy
pine stands le t in the Northeast. Most of the pine in
of which are pure pine, while others contaiy ine in various mixtures. While these stands are
frequently heavy, they contain very httle c ear material suitable for wing beams and similar
uses. The virgin white pine in the Appalachian region is now chiefly in the South, from West
Virginia southward. In this region it occurs scattered through mixed hardwood and hemlock
stands, and its average qualit EJnot so high as is that of the pine in the Lake States. Virgin
white pine averages 3 feet anzmore in diameter and 100 feet or more in height.
Only the su ply of virgin timber need be considered in discussing wood suitable for aircraft
construction. ' f b s i roughly estimated a t 12 billion board feet, of which 10 billion feet
s
(25 er cent of it Norway pme) is in the Lake States (chiefl in northern iMinnesota), and
2 bi&on feet in the southern Appalachians. It is practically d o n large tracts owned by land
and lumber companies, and most of it is accessible and avadable for existing mills.

3

P

Rk

tL

rp

I

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

From 1913 to 1917, the average annual cut of white pine lumber was nearl 2,100 million
feet, as against an avera e of about 3,500 million feet during 1907 to 1912. $he white pine
timber have
cut has been steadily fa&off for a number of years as the supplies of vir
* g l
become more nearl exhausted. It may be expected to continue to fall rapi y until the few
billion feet left in &mnesota are cut, after which'a fairly constant amount will be cut each
year from second-growth stands.
Of the present cut, a little more than half, or about 1,200 million feet, comes from virgin
timber. About 900 million feet of this is cut in Minnesota, 210 million feet in Wisconsin and
Michigan, and 75 million feet in the southern A alachians. Small amounts of virgin white
pine are cut in Maine, Pennsylvania, and New R r k . Ninety per cent of the virgin pine is
sawed by large mills, a number of which cut 25 million feet or more a
Fourteen mills in
Minnesota and one in Wisconsin reported cuts of this size in 1917. TgZi'mills cut white and
Norway pines principally; some of them cut little of any other species. In the South, white
pine usually forms only a minor part of the cut of the mills that produce it. The secondowth pine of the Northeast is almost entirely cut by small stationary or portable mills.
&me 350 operators in New England reported cuts in 1917 of between 500 thousand and
5 million feet, and.only six re orted cuts in excess of 5 million feet. Lake States mills have a
total capacity far in excess o their present output.
Logging in the Lake States pine region is mostly done in the winter, since surface conditions favor hauling when the ground IS frozen. In the Appalachians logging is carried on
throughout the year. Most operators use animals, and cut few logs more than 16 feet long,
except of Norway pine, which is frequently cut 18 and 20 feet long. The larger operators use
logging railroads.
s
Straight grain i a characteristic of white pine, and little effort is necessary to
material of that quality. It is estimated that 85 er cent of the material graded B Se ect and
better, or from 50 to 60 er cent of that graded Select and better, will be suitable for nirlane use. In the Lake h a t e s region about 14 per cent of the cut from old stands is D and
getter, which wcdd make from 7 to 8+ per cent of the cut suitable for aircraft, if it-were cut
in the proper sizes. I n the Appalachians probably not more than 4 per cent of the cut would
be satisfactory.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.
White pine, once the most widely used lumber in the United States for general construction
and other purposes, has come to be more and more a wood for special uses, and only a very small
part of the cut is now used in its rough form. Half of the total cut goes into planing mill

r

P

B

produce

21

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRBFT WOODS.

f

products---sash, doors, blinds, sidin and similar articles, which.re uire fairly high- ade
material. Nearly two-fifths is used f y the box and crate industr , w&h, a t least unti the
last few years, used white pine more than any other wood. This indTustry uses chiefly low-grade
lumber. Considerable quantities of upper-grade-white pine are. used not only in s h p and boat
building, but also for patterns, tanks, silos, funuture, and musical instruments. Upper grades
of Norway pine go into planing mill products, ladders, and cars.
White pine reaches a somewhat extended market; but, now that it is largely used b manuacilities
facturing industries, a great part of it is sold in the Northern and Eastern States.
for shipping are good, for most of the large mills are so located as to be able to transport their
output either by rail or by water.

d

WESTERN WHITE PINE.
(Pinw nwntirola.)
This species is also known as Iriaho white pine, mountain pine, and silver pine.

DISTRIBUTION.

While the range of this species extends from southern British Columbia to western Montana
and south along the Cascades and Sierras to central California, the re..ion of its eat commercid importance is in the Panhandle of Idaho and in adjacent parts of Gontana an Washington.

r

USE IN AIRCRrlFT.

While slightly heavier than spruce, western white pine compares very well with it in all
stren th properties except hardness. It makes a fairly satisfactory substitute for spruce for
wing eams and similar uses. It is also a good material for pl ood cores because of its comparative lightness. However, because of the relatively sma percentage of the cut that is
available for airplane use, and because of the abundance of othef woods suitable for the same
purpose, it is likely that western white pine under normal con&tions will not be a very iniportant source of material for the manufacture of aircraft.

%

lT

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

*

-

Western white pine occasipnally appears in pure or almost pure stands on limited areas,
but is more commonly found III mixture with western hemlock? western red cedar, western
larch, Douglas fir, grand fir, and lodgepole pine. I n the region of its best development it occurs
at low and mid& e!evations, but m the coast region it is more a tree of the higher elevations,
where, however, it usually constitutes only a very insignificant proportion of the stand. The
tree reaches a fairly large size, with diameters frequently in excess of 5 feet and heights from
100 to 150 feet at maturity. Larger sizes are not uncommon.
Logging conditions are not equally favorable everywhere in the white-pine territory, and a
large portion of the stand as yet is somewhat inaccessible, but it 1s estmated that from 15 to 20
per cent of the stand is available to existing mills.
The total stand has been estimated at about 29 biUion feet, of which 6&billion feet is on
National Forests, 3 billion feet is owned by the States (principally Idaho), and 194 billion feet is
held by private interests, mostly in large holdings of lumber companies or railroads. The greater
part of this is in northern Idaho and tne northeast corner of Washington.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The avera e annual cut of western white pine between 1913 and 1017 was 350 million feet,
conditions during the
and the generaf tendency indicates a sight increase, except that %bnormal
past two years have caused production to f d off. About SO per cent of the cut is normally
made in Idaho, and 15 per cent in Washington. Ninety per cent of the total is cut by large,
well-e uipped mills, nearly all of which saw associated species as well as pine. About 30 er
cent their total cut is white pine. The capacity of existing miUs would allow nearly doube
the present cut.
The logging season usually lasts from -:‘E to eight months, being limited by the deep.snow.;
which fall in much of the region. Logs are usually cut 16 feet or less in length. The majority
of operators use animal loggmg, but a few large concerns log by steam. Logs are either driven
to the mills or carried by rad. While no attempt is usually made to saw straight-grained material, most of the larger operators hpve.become familiar with the requirements for airplane
material during the war, and can saw it if it is in demand.
Most of the airplane material will come from the clear grades of lumber. The grndin
rules allow a few s m d knots in these grades, and probably these defects, together with crooke8

01

-

I

22

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOB AEROE?AVEES.

,

I

23

SXJPPLTES AND PRODUCTION OF BIBCRAFT WOODS.

grain and low density, would cause the rejection of a small proportion of the upper-grade material. It is estimated that an average of from 2 to 3 per cent of the cut of western white pine
would be suitable for aircraft construction.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER

Western white pine is used for about the same purposes as eastern white pine. The uppergrade lumber is largely employed for sash, doors, mterior finish, and sirmlar purposes, and is
marketed to a large extent in the agricultural States to the east. A little of it goes as far as
the Atlantic coast. Lower-grade lumber is used in building and for boxes and crates, for which
there is a good demand in the white-pine section and adjacent regions.

SUGAR PINE.
(Pima lm-)
ab.
DIS~UTION.

-

Su ar pine occurs on the Coast ranges of southern Ore on and northern California and
along t e southern Cascades, the west slopes of the Sierras, a in lower California. It is most
n
abundant and of best development in the Sierras.

%

%

USE I AIRCRAFT.
N

of stiffness, and it varies
Sugar pine is low in shock resisting ability and in the
for wing beams or other
widely m its strength properties. It is not, therefore, well
and easy to work, it may
arts of aircraft where great strength’is a requisite. Being
however, it is likely that
ge used in less critical parts, articularly for plywood
spruce and other species cut or wing beams prill yield a large supply of suitable small-sized
material, sugar pine may never become very nnportant for auplane uses.

P

-

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Su ar pine never occurs in extensive pure stands, but is scattered through stands of western ye&w pine, Jeffrey pine, white fir, incense cedar, and Douglas fir, where it usually comprises from 10 to 30 per cent of the stand. It grows a t medium elevations in rollin or rough
country and, for the most part, where it can be log ed without great difliculty. till much
of the sugar pine country IS‘asyet undeveloped, an probably less than one-thwd of the total
stand is available to existmg mills. Sugar pine reaches large sues; diameters of 6 feet or more
are common, with heights up to 200 feet or even more.
The stand of this s ecies has been estimated a t 45 billion feet, of which 33 billion feet is
in California and 12 bigion feet in Ore on. The figure for Oregon is probably ve much
too high. Fourteen billion feet in Ca%fornia and 2 billion feet in Or on is on Tational
Forests. Most of the remainder is privately owned, principally by large umber companies,
the Southern Pacific Railroad, and large landowners.

8

f

7

.

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

From 1913 to 1917 the average annual cut of sugar pine lumber was 140 million feet,
which represents nearly 30 per cent increase over the.cut between 1907 and 1912. All but an
insignificant amount of this lumber was cut in California, and 90 per cent of it by large mills,
In 1917, 6 mills reported the production of more than 10 million feet of sugar pine each, and
11 other mills reported cuts of between 1 and 10 million feet. Sugar pine makes up one-fourth
of the total cut of the mills which saw it. Most of these mills cut cluefly western yellow pine,
with some white fir, Douglas fir, and incense cedar. The mill capacity of the re ion is more
than twice the present cut. The large available supply of timber indicates that &e cut may
be ex ected to increase for some time.
%gs are cut between May and November, deep snow in the mountains making winter
logging impracticable. S u ar ine is cut as it comes with its associated species. Steam lo
ging is generally practiced y t e larger companies, but animals are also used to a con-; lerabf;
extent. A l large operators use log=
l
railroads. Logs are generally cut from 10 to 20 feet
long.
It is estimated that 9 er cent of the total cut of su r pine falls in the two upper grades,
No. 1 and No. 2 clear, an 4 per cent in No. 3 clear. gaterial suitable for airplane use will
come chiefl from these grades, together with a small amount of short material from No. f
shop. Progably from 9 to 10 per cent of the total cut will be suitable for aircraft.

f
x

B

.

24

ANXlJAL REPORT I?ATIOI?AL ADVISORY COMB6ITI"EE FOR BEBOBAUTICS.

d

Z

25

SUPPLIES A N D PRODUCTIOX OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.
MARKETS AND USES FOB LUMBER.

A proximately half the cut of sugar pine lumber is normally used as it comes from the
sawmi 1 for construction and similar purposes. The other half IS’ further manufactured into
a variety of forms, chief among which are planing-mill products (sash, doors, blinds, finish),
which use 26 per cent of the total cut, and boxes and crates, which use 20 per cent of the total.
Small quantities, chiefly high-grade material, go into musical instruments, furniture, patterns,
woodenware, fixtures, and boats.
A considerable art of the high-pade material finds its way to eastern markets. The
lower grades of lum er and the box material are used principally in California, where the
demand for such material is gr0at.

P

.

E

-TERN
HEMLOCK.
( T q aheterophylh.)

1

This species 14 also known as Prince Albert’s fir and Alaska pine.
DISTRIBUTION.

Western hemlock occurs from northwestern Montana and northern Idaho to Alaska, and
south dong the Cascades and Coast ranges to central California. It is of commercial importance in the Pacific coast region from southern Oregon to Alaska.
USE IN AIRCRAFl‘.

Heavier than spruce, but lighter than Douglas fir, western hemlock is low in shock resistance. It might be used as a substitute. for s ruce, but it is probable that it will be so used
only to a limited extent so long as supplles of etter material are available. It makes a satisfactory core for pl ood, and may sometimes be of considerable importance for this purpose,
since the supply is arge and the wood comparatively cheap.

g

T

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Along the Pacific coast, western hemlock is usually the redominant species in mixed
stands with s ruce, western red cedar, Douglas fir, and granI f fir. It is sometimes found in,
pure stands aYon the coast of Washington and Oregon, while in Alaska extensire pure
stands of hemloct or mixed stands of hemlock and Sitka spruce are common. Along the Cascades it forms a much smaller proportion of the stand. The timber is nearly all in dense virgin
stands, on both lowlands and hgher slopes. Trees reach large size, with diameters a t maturity
of from 6 to 10 feet and heights up to 200 feet.
The stand in Washington, Oregon, and AJaska is estimated at about 132 billion board feet,
of which approximaktdy 57 billion feet is rivately owned, chiefly by large timber corn anies,
and 75 billion feet by the public, mostly on ational Forests. Thirty-three billion feet is in &egon,
54 billion feet in Washington, and 45 billion feet in Alaska.

rp

PRODUCTION OF LURIBER.

The average annual cut of western hemlock lumber averaged 325 million feet for the years
1913 to 1917. Nearly 85 per cent of it was produced in Washington and most of the rest in
Oregon. In 1917, 10 mills, all in Washington, reported cuts of more than 10 million feet of
hemlock. Forty-four mills in Washington, 19 in Oregon, 1 i California, and 1 in Idaho reported
n
cuts of between 1 and 10 million feet. Hemlock is considered an inferior species by most oper-

areas
ators, and is cut along with other species only incidentally. In selecting logging cl~nces,
which run heavily to hemlock are usually passed by for those with larger proportions of the
more valuable species. Hemlock makes up about 11 per cent of the cut of the mills reporting
it. If they operated to ca acity (one shift) and cut hemlock in the same proportion as at
present, existing mills co d increase their production more than 50 per cent. Production
will robably tend to increase for many years as the lumber industry of the Nortlix-est develops.
$0 wing is carried on for about 10 months in the year. Steam logging is the rule, with
railroakr, in some cases, watcr transportation. Lo- are cut from 32 to 40 feet long. Operators make no effort to saw for straightness of grain, but attempt to get a inasimum amount
of clear material.
The best available estimates indicate that not more than 3 per cent of the cut i i the two
s n
upper grades of hemlock, which include most of the material suitable for airplanes. It is estimated that not more than one-third of the material in these grades, or 1 per cent of the tdtal
lumber cut, could be used for this purpose.

up

135572-194

.

26

ANNUAL BEPORT NATIONAL AJN’ISOBY COMMXTTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

27

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTIOS OF I I I B C W T WOODS.

MARKETS AND USES FOB THE LUMBER.

The bulk of hemlock lumber (including eastern and western s ecies) is used in the rough
for construction work and only about 30 per cent is further mandctured. Most of this goes
no
into laning-mill products, whch consume 17 er cent of the cut, and i t boxes and crates,
whici use 8 per cent. Most of the upper-gra& western hemlock is used for finish, flooring,
and siding.
Western hemlock is marketed along with Do
Probably the greater part of it,
being comparatively low-grade material, ISused on t e Pacific coast and in contiguous territory.

Yas

REDWOOD.

.

(Sequoiu aempavirms.)
Bigtree (Sequviagigantea) ia included with the redwood i the &cumion i thia chapter.
n
n

.

.

- .

DISTRIBUTION.

The redwood occurs in the coast belt of northern California from just below San Francisco
Ba to the Coos Bay district of southern Oregon. The bulk of it is in Del Norte, Humboldt,
a n 8 Mendocino Counties, Calif. The bigtree, which is also sold as redwood, occurs on the
west slope of the central Sierras over very E t e d areas.
USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Redwood is variable in its properties and is apt to be brash; hence it i robably not suitable
s
aa a substitute for spruce in awcraft. It is, however, an 'excellent wood or plywood cores on
account of its lightness and the ease with which it can be worked.

P

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Redwood forms pure forests in northern California; farther south it occurs as groves scattered among other species. The trees reach enormous size, with very heavy stands. Redwood
is seldom found above 3,000 feet elevation. Bigtree reaches even larger sizes than does redwood. It usually occurs in groves mixed with such other species as western yellow pine, sugar
pine, white fir, and incense cedar, and is found at elevations between 5,000 and 8,400 feet.
The total stand of redwood is estimated a t about 73 billion board feet, practically all of
which is in the hands of a few large private owners.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

-

The annual cut of redwood lumber has not fluctuated widely for the past 10 or 15 ears
from the average of ap roxiraately 500 million board feet. Almost the entire cut is pro uced
by 34 mills, whch hange redwood almost exclusively. The capacity of these mills is rated at
about, 850 million feet a year. In 1917,18 mills re orted cuts of from 5 to 25 million feet, 4 mills
from 25 to 75 million feet, and 1 mill in excess o 75 million feet. Two of these m i l l s were in
the coast region below San Francisco Bay, one was in the Sierra bigtree region, and the rest
were on the northwest coast.
1
Logging operations are carried on throughout the year in the redwood belt. A 1 operators
. use steam e upment and logging railroads. Most of the upper-grade lumber i now cut in
s
16-foot leng%s. While no particular effort is made to saw straight ained material, redwood
is naturally straight grained and the proportion of such material pro uced is large.
About 50 er cent of the cut is in the Clear and Sap Clear grades, and it is estimated that,
after allowing for sin, pitch pockets, shake, and other defects, at least half of this, or 25 per
cent of the cut, w' be suitable for aircraft construction.

c9

P

r

l
f

MARBETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

.

Three-fourths of the redwood lumber produced by sawmills is used, without further manufacture, for general construction and for railroad ties. Planing-mill products take 19 per cent
of the cut, wood pipe about 2 per cent snd tanks and silos almost as much. A great number
of industries use smaller amounts.
A large pro ortion of the lumber and ties, as well as of the manufactured roducts, is used
in California. gedwood is Gold, however, in all parts of the United States anl f is shipped to a
number of foreign countries, especially to those on the Pacific.
. .

28

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORP COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

0
c

29

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.

BALD CYPRESS.
( TazodizCm distichurn.)
Thh species ia also known aa cypress, swamp cypress, southern cypress, b k k cypress, red cypress, and white
cypress.
-DISTRIBUTION.
I

Cypress occursin the Atlantic and GulfcoastalregionsfromsouthernDelaware to Texas, and
along the bottom lands of the Mississippiand its tributaries to southern Illinois and Indiana. It is
best developed and most abundant in southern Louisiana (Atchafalaya region) and in Florida.
USE IN AIRCRAFI’.

Cypress is slightly heavier than spruce. Carefully selected pieces are somewhat superior in
strength to spruce when used in the same sizes. It is, however, great1 variable in its strength
pro erties, and selection of suitable piecesis m c u l t on that account. &rthermore, satis€actory
g and gluing have not yet been developed. Until these difficulties are overcome
megods of T
it will probab y not be a popular wood for aircraft use.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.
Cypressgrows in practically pure stands or in mixture with tupelo over large areas of swampy
land where most other s ecies can not live. It is also found in mixture with a great variety of
hardwoods common to t e reoion. Stands are frequently very heavy, and mature trees are of
very large size. Diameters orfrom 6 to 8 feet or even more are not uncommon.
The total remainii stand has been variouslp estimated a t from 25 to 40 billion board feet,
the lower figure probab; y being more nearly correct. Possibly half of the stand is available to
existing plants. Most of it is owned in large units by land and lumber companies.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.
.
b
An average of sliehtly over a billion feet of cypress lumber was cut each year from 1913 to
1917, which is more &an 100 million feet in excess of the average cut during the six preceding
years. The cut is now about stationary, but will decline in a few years as the virgin su ply becomes more nearly exhausted. More than half of the total cut now comes from the Atciafalapa
Basin of southern Louisiana,.and about 20 per cent is cut in Florida. Eighty per cent of the total
is cut by some 205 large d l s .
Trees are usually girdled for some months before they are felled, in order to make the logs
lighter. Logs are c o q o n l y cut 16 feet or shorter, and are gott’en to ether by means of steam
skidders mounted on “pull boats.” They am then towed to the
Some operators use
ra*oad transportation where the Burface conditionu’.allow it. The logs are usually sawed without regard to strai htness of gram. To produce arplane stock they should be sawed parallel
to the bark, since t e taper is excessive. Since cypress lumber is very hard to kiln-dry on account of its tendency to caseharden and to check, it is usually air-dried for nearly a year before
being shipped.
Because of the difficulties in the way of the use of this species, particular1 wit.h regard to
its eat variability in densit it is not eas to estimate how much is suita le for aircraft.
Sucfmaterial will come large y from the gra es known as tank (1 er cent of the average cut),
A (8 per cent), B (7 er cent), and fnctory selects (5 per cent).
rough estimate places the
possible airplane stoc at about 12 per cent of the total cut.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.
One-third of the c res6 lumber cut is used as it comes from the mill for construction and
similar purposes. O n s a l f of the cut is used for planing-mill products-sash, doors, finish,
molding, and similar uses. Four per cent is used for boxes and crates, 31 per cent for tanks
and silos, 2 per cent for caskets and cof%s, If per cent each for laundry appliances and machino
construction. Smaller quantities are a plied to man other uses.
Cypress lumber is very widely sol in the Unite States, and considerable quantities go to
foreign countries.
ASH.

fl

P

‘

A.

%

%.

1

91

1

R

a

B

WHITE ASH (Fraxinua Americana). BILTMORE ASH (Fraxinws biltmorennu). GREEN ASH (Frm’nur Zunceolata). PUMPKIN ASH (Fraxinzu rofunda). OREGON ASH (Fruxinw oregunu). BLACK ASH (Fratanus
niqra). BLUE ASH (Fraxinua ptladpmnpd~ta).
Thereare about ten other species of ash, none of which, however, are of commercial importancDISTRIBUTION.

Ash occurs all over the eastern United States and along the streams in theplainsregion almost
to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains. Several species of no commercial importance occur inthe Southwest. The Ore on ash, which is of some mportance within its ran e, occurs in the
Pacific coast region from k ~ eSound to central California and along the f o o t b of the mount
tains as far aspouthern Cdornia.

-

30

ANNUAL aEpORT NATIONAL ADVISOBY COBhMplTEE FOR AEBONAUTICS.

SUPPLIES AND PBODUCTION OF

.

dIBcRdpT WOODS.

31

32

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

White ash is common in all States east of the Edississippi, except in the Coastal Plain region,
but is not very important in the lower Mississippi valley. Biltmore ash is chiefly in.Tennessee,
Kentucky, Ohio, and Indiana. Green ash is of greatest commercial importance in the bottomlands of the Mississippi and its tributaries and in the Coastal Plain reeon. Pumpkin ash is of
importance on1 in southeastern Missouri and eastern North Carolina. Ore on ash is of some
importance in Gashington and Ore on, Black ash is chiefly found in-the f a k e States and in
northern New England and New Yog. Blue ash is of some importance in Kentucky, Tennessee,
Indiana, Ohio, and southern Missouri.

-

USE IN AIRCRAFI‘.

The ashes known commercially as “white ash” include both white ash and green ash, as well
l
as the Biltmore and blue ashes. Al of these are ver desirable woods for use in aircraft. White
ash has great strength and stiffness, bends very we$, and is usually fairly straight grained. It
is used very extensively for longerons, bent work on wings and fuselage, landing skids, and
other parts of the frtimework of amraft, and has been used to some extent for pro ellers. Second-growth ash is more likely to have the requisite density and hence is frequentfy considered
more desirable than old-growth ash for those uses in which great toughness is required. Oregon
ash is probably as ood as white ash. Black ash is not so stiff as the others, but is ver tough
and is excellent for tending. It should make good plywood. Pumpkin ash is lighter an weaker
than the other ashes, and therefore, is not desirable for air lane construction. Northern-grown
white ash has been considered more satisfactory than that rom the South, robabl on account
of the fact that a large art of the ash now cut in the North is from secon&rowtEstands, and
s
a
because the northern ! has on the average a higher density than that from the South, which is
largely green ash. In the South brash material of the better species of ash is usually sold under
the name of pumpkin ash.

P

I

B

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Ash occurs in mixed hardwood stands and seldom forms more than a small ro ortion of the
o
!
stands, and
mixture. White ash in the North ordinaril makes up from 5 to 10 per cent !l
sometimes from 20 to 50 per cent of seconLgrowth stands over lirmted areas. Green ash is a
more important component of most of the stands in which it OCCUIS, and is frequently the predominant species in certain parts. Black ash makes u from 1 to 10 per cent of the stands
where it grows, and over lirmted areas is occasionally t e predominant tree.
Except in northern New England and New York and in northern Michigan and Wisconsin,
most of the northern and eastern ash is from second-growth stands, and a large part of it is from
woodlots. The Southern ash, as well as some of that in the Lake States, still comes to a large
extent from extensive tracts in vir ‘n forests. The old-growth supply is rapidly dwindling, and
a lar er and larger pro ortion of t b cut is comin from second growth.
f’here are no ava&ble estimates of the stan2 of ash by s ecies The total of all species is
estimated a t about 104 billion board feet, of which about 1+b&on feet is in New England and
New York, 16 billion feet in the Lake States, 13 billion feet in the central woodlot re ’on, 14
billion feet in the southern Appdachians, and 4+ billion feet in the lower Mississippi v&y and
Gulf region.
In about the order named, the States with the largest stands are: Arkansas, Louisiana,
?dksouri, Ohio, Texas, Mississip i, Michigan, Tennessee, Geor ia, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Maine,
and New York. These States gave about three-fourths of a i the ash in the United States.

R

p;:

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The average cut of ash lumber during the five years 1913 to 1917 ww just under 200 million feet a year, or about 50 million feet less than the average annual cut during the preceding six
years. The lumber cut is steadily dcclining and may be expected to do so until it reaches a figure
approximately equal to the annual increase of second-growth stands.
Besides the ash cut in the form of lumber, much of the handle and vehicle stock is cut
directly from logs or bolts, from 25 to 35 million feet is used for slack cooperage, and 2 or 3
million feet is made into veneer. In normal times from 5 to 7 million feet of ash logs is cut for
export.
Arkansas and Louisiana are now the leading States in the production of ash, and together
they produce one-fourth of a l l the ash lumber cut in the United S+,ates. Following them, come
Wisconsin, Tennessee, Indiana, Mississip i, New York, and bdichigan. These States together
produce about 60 er cent of the total. twenty-nine mills reported cuts in 1917 of more than
one million feet o f ash. Two of these were in northern New England, 3 in Indiana, 5 in the.
southern coastal re ’on, and the rest in the lower Mississippi valley. Ash lumber is cut in smaller
amounts by a very arge number of both large and small mills.

T

SUPPLIES bmD PRODUCTlON OF AlRCRAI?T WOODS.

33

Logging in most of the -ash regions is carried on throughout the year, except that in the
river bottoms it i usually intern ted by high-water periods. Steam logging is sometimes
s
eGployed, but animal logging is use by moat operatom. Logs are carried to the mi& by rafts,
railroads, teams, or motor trucks, according to the reflion in which the operations are conducted.
Logs are usually cut in lengths of 16 feet or less. Aftany operators use considerable care to saw
straight- ained lumber, particularly from the white ashes, since so many of the uses to which
an
high- a e ash is put require strai htness of w i .
&e strongest matenal is us&y sawed &om within 7 inches of the center of the trees;
consequently, trees of comparatively small diameters may produce as much airplane material
as trees from virgin stands. The proportion of
h-grade material produced varies, of course,
with the size of 'the trees as well as with the loc 'ty where they grow. From second-growth
white ash stands, trees under 10 inches in diameter yield no firsts and seconds, and about 50
per cent No. 1 common; trees 20 inches in diameter yield over 40 per cent firsts and seconds,
and about 35 per cent No. 1 common. Assuming the averawe pismeters to be from 14 to 16
inches, an average proportion i about 25 per cent firsts an$ seconds, and 42 per cent No. 1
s
common.
MARKETS AND USES FOB THE LUMBER.

B

r

"5;

.

Practically all of the ash lumber cut is further manufactured before it reaches the consumer.
Ap roximately 22 per cent is used for handles, especially those for spades, shovels, hoes, rakes,
anxforks, for which long, stiff, tough, strai ht-grained pieces are re uifed. More ash than any
other wood except hickory is used for hanf les. Twenty per cent o the cut is used for butter
hs
tubs. T i material is nearly all green and black ash, and comprises short, clear lengths cut
from low-grade logs. Fifteen per cent is used in vehicle manufacture, for such parts as poles,
tongues, axles, and felloes, which require tough white or green ash of high quality, and for
bodes, which are made of larger pieces of old-growth ash. Planing-mill products take 7 per
cent of the cut, much of it black ash. Refrigerators and kitchen cabinets (mostly'black ash),
furniture (mostly black ash), car construction (all species) each take about 6 per cent of the cut.
A icultural implements and oars (both of which require high- ade white and green ash) each
tafe about 3 per cent. Athletic goods, musical instruments, &tures, hames, and many other
products that call for a wood grade of material take smaller amounts.
Ash is either man2actured into the finished product near where it is cut or is shipped to the
centers of the wood-manufacturing industry in the Northern and Eastern States. Several
million feet of logs is normally exported to Europe each year and several million feet of lumber
goes to Europe and to South America.
4
- BASSWOOD.

P

( T a k americana.)
species is also called linden, linn, and whitewood. Downy basswood (T,
pubescens) and white barswood
(T. heterophylk) should probably also be grouped with the common basswood. D t are not available, however,
aa
with respect to the strength of these species.
DISTBIBUTION.

Basswood occurs from northern New Brunswick to Lake Winnipew south to Virginia,
northern Georgia and Alabama, eastern Texas, and as far west as eastern%akota, Kansas, and
Oklahoma. I t reaches its largest size in the lower Ohio River bottom lands, but is more abundant northward.
USE IN AIRCRAFI'.
Basswood is light in weight but low in stren th; consequently it is not a ood substitute
for spruce. It is, however, one of the best WOO s in ability to take nails wit out splitting,
$n
and is excellent for webs of wing ribs and for plywood cores generally. It is also used for thin
flooring plank.

f

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Through most of its ran e basswood is found in mixture with other hardwoods. In the
North it frequently is the pre ominating species in the stand, and sometimes forms pure stands
over limited areas. Mature trees frequently reach diameters of ,from 3 to 4 feet and heights
of more than 100 feet. Whie much of the basswood is in situations in which logwing can be
s
done with litA*,. iLifficulty, a considerable part of it is in localities a yeti undevelopea Fnd is not
available to existin mills.
The total stanfis estimated at approximately 9 billion board feet, of which 80 per cent is
in Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, Iowa, New York, Kentucky, West Vir inia, and Vermont,
in-the order named. There is about 14 billion feet in New England and kew York, 5 billion.

2

I

34

dmEmaL REPORT NATIONAL ADPISOBY COMM-

.

FOB AERONAUTICS.

.

. .

.
. .

.

SUPPLIES AND PRODWCCIOX OF MRCRAF!L' WOODS.

35

feet in the Lakes States, 13 billion feet in the southern AppalacIiians, and 1 billion feet in the
central wood-lot region.
Much of the virgin stand, which is in northern New England, the Lake States; and the
southern Appalachians, is owned-by la e land and lumber companies. Outside of these three
.
regions, most of the basswood is 1 ~ s m a holdings.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

of other woods by all of these

It is estimated that from 16 to 20 per cent of the basswood cut will Fade firsts and seconds,
il
and that from 22 to 25 per cent wl grade No. 1 common. The proportions will robably run a
little higher in the South, where the trees are somewhat larger. Material suitahe for aircraft
il
construction wl come from these grades, principdy from the first.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

Practically d of the basswood lumber cut is further manufactured before it reaches the
consumer. Twenty-three er cent of the total goes into the box industry; 16 per cent into
finish and other planing m& products; 16 per cent into woodenware; 9 per cent into furniture;
6 per cent (more, than of any other one species) into trunks and valises; 53 per cent into picture frames and molding; 3 per cent lnto musical instruments; 23 per cent into toys. A
wide variety of other ihdustries use lesser amounts.
Basswood lumber is marketed chiefly in the region of wood-manufacturing industries, that
is, the North Atlantic and North Central States.

BEECH.
(F-

aftopunicea.)

DISTBIBUTION.

. Beech occurs from New Brunswick to northern Wisconsin and south to eastern Texas
and western Florida. It reaches its best development in the Northern States, the lower Ohio
V d e y and the Appalachians.
USE IN AIRCRAFl'.

Having stren th properties very siplilar to those of maple and birch, it makes a fairly
satisfactory p r o p er wo?d where re wrements are not too exacting, and was used for this
i also a satisfactory materid for plywood. Because
s
pu ose to some extent m Europe.
of 'ge comparatively large and accessible supplies of the timber fairly close to centers of consumpt
tion, and because of the cheapness of the material, beech may be of considerable importance in
the future of airplane manufttctunng.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER

i

It,

Beech sometimp forms nee-? ure stands over 1.k 'ted areas, but is usually found ip mixture with other specws, such as b r c sugar maple, basswood, and herfllock. In such mxtures
it i frequently the predoqnant species. Mature trees 3 feet or more in dlameter are common.
s
Most of the beech 19 in fmrly accessible regions, in situations which offer no serious difficulty

R

in

lowf
i e accurate data as to the stand of beech timber are lacking, rough estimates indicate
Seven-eighths of it is in the

that there is from 20 to 25 billion board feet in the United States.

36

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMI!I!TEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

I

. 37

SUPPLIES Al?D PRODUCTIOX OF dIBCBAFT WOODS.

following State?, which are named in the order of t.heir importance &s beech States: MiFhigan,
New Yo&, Maine, Indiana, Kentucky, Oho, New Hampshire, Vermont, Pennsylvarua, and
West Virginia. It is estimated that there is about 8 billion feet in New England and Flew York,
4 billion feet in Michigan and Wisconsin, 5 billion feet in the southern Appalachians, and 4
billion feet in the central woodlot re 'on.
Much of the v' 'n timber rn the Eake States, noGhern New England and New York, and
the Ap alachiaq E e l d by lar e lumber companies or land companies. A large amount of
holdings, particularly in the Central States.
beech, owever, IS found on

R

PRODUCTION OF LuMBE&

The aver e annual cut of beech lumber i the United States from 1913 to 1917,was 350
n
d o n feet. ?or the Six yeam revious it was 440 d i o n feet per yew.
The production of
beech lumber is, therefore, slow y declining apd may be expected to do 80 u t l it reaches the
ni
point where it does not exceed the increase m second-growth stands. Mich an produces 20
er cent of.the total, followed by Indiana, West Virginia, Pennsylvania., NewFork, Ohio, and
kentuckp The first five States named produce nearly three-fouths of the total.
Beech is cut, along with assoaated hardwoods or hardwoods and conifers, by a large number
of both large &nd small mills. Probably the larger proportion of the high-grade material is
roduced by f a d y large mills, each of which cuts several hundred thousand feet of beech.
!&ere are only abput a dozen mil@ that cut more than 2+ million feet of beech apiece Horse
log 'ng is the rule in the beech temtory, although a few large operators use steam. Both animil
anfrrulroad transportation are used, and, where roads are ood, mptor trucks are coming into
- use to carry logs to the mill. Loggin operations are Carrie on dunng most of the year.
iss
I n the Lake States, approximptc y 12 er cent of the cut will 0 ade f r t and seconds. and
23 per cent KO.1 common. Possibly the Bhio valle and Ap alacgan timber may run a little
better. It i estimated that from 5 to 1 per cent o firsts an seconds can be cut into quarters
0
sawed stock suitable for propellers.

P

8

P

P

MABgETS

1

AND USES FOR THE LUMBE&

About 65 per cent of the beech lumber produced is further manufactured. Of this amount,
1 . per cent IS made into planing mill products; 11.2 per cent into furniture and chairs; 3 9
35
.
per cent into handles; 3 3 per cent into woodenware; 2 per cent into laundry ap liances, and
.
1 5 per cent into brushes. Lesser uantities are utilized for vehicles, agricultur implements,
.
musical instruments, spools and bo bins, tops, and many other products. The box and crate
industry uses 18.3 per cent.
On the whole, beech lumber is generally sold quite near the place where it is produced, since
much of the beech region is also the section of woodworking industries.

2

%

BIRCH.
SWEET BIRCH (Betula Ientaj.
This apecies is sleo known aa black birch, cherry birch, and mahogany birch.

YELLOW BIRCH (Betdu Z t )
um.
Thie species is slso known aa silver birch, awamp birch, and gray birch.
DISTRIBUTION.

The range of sweet birch extends from Newtoundland to western Ontario, central Iowa,
southern Illinois, and south along the Appalachian Mountains to Florida. While most abundant
in the North, it reaches its largest size on the western slo es of the southern Appalachians.
Yellow birch occurs from Newfoundland to northern New ngland, northern Minnesota, and
south along the A palachiam to Tennessee and North Caxolina. It is most abundant and of
largest size in nortiern New England and New York, and in northern Michigan and Wisconsin.

E

USE IN AIBCRAFT.

Birch of these two species is quite heavy, hard, stif€, and resistant to wear, of uniform
texture, and takes a fine %ish. It, therefore, makes satisfactory
ellers except where the
requirements are exceptionally exactin . It has been used for
in several countries.
Birch plywood is widel used in d?e manufacture of
of its resistance to
wear, its stiffness, and ease o bending, it is especiallygood for face ply where thinness is essential.
On account of the fairly large and accessible pupplies of birch timber located at no great
distance from the centers of manufacture, birch wlll probably continue to be a very important,
wood in the aircraft industry.

9

I

38

AXNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMmdITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

'I
39

SUPPLIES bmD PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

While birch is frequently found in pure or h o s t pure stands of second growth over small
hardwoods and conifers,
amon which sugar maple, beech, basswood, hemlock, spruce; and pme are important. Mature
sweet%irch trees run from 2 to 3 feet in diameter and from 70 to 80 feet in heght, while yellow
birch avera es a little larger.
!
Much o the virgin birch in northern New Englapd and in theplppalachian region is still
somewhat distant from sawmill plants. The b m h region of Wmconsm and the adjacent part of
upper Michigan is the most fully develo ed a t present.
Estimates of the total stand of birc are very unsatisfactory, and no attempt is made to
d i s t y h the species. The best available figure for all the birches together is approximately
19 bilion board feet. This includes several species other than the t;wo under dwcussion, but
the proportion of these (principally paper birch and river birch) is relativelg small. The States
ha
the largest stands of birch are, m the order named: Maine, W~consm,
New York, Michp a n x e s o t a , Vermont, New Ham hire, which together have about 90 per cent of the total
t is estimated that there is in New Ep" land and New York 10 billion feet, in the Lake States 8
.
billion feet, and in the southern Appalac 'ans 1 billion feet.
The greater part of the old-growth birch w owned by lumber companies or by land-investment compssies, m large or fairly large unita.
areas, it seldom so o c c m in v r i stands, but is rnixed with oth!r
ign

1

%

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The average annual cut. of birch lumber in the United States between 1913 and 1917 was
440 million board feet. Ths IS a httle i excess of the averqe cut during the preceding six
n

years. In other words, the production of birch is yet on the mcrease, and the present rate of
af
output ma be expected to be maintamed for some years to come. Hl of the total is cut in
northem &sconsm, and two-thirds in Wisconsin and Wchigan together. After these, the
important producing States are: Vermont, Maine, West T i , and New York. These six
States report more than 90 er cent of the total cut. It is estimated that 85 per cent of the
s
birch cut in Wisconsin and &chqpn i yellow birch, and most of the remainder is sweet birch.
This ro ortion is doubtless approximately correct for the other States named.
M e birch is cut by a large number of small mlls, by far the eater proportion is cut by
il.
large m l s In northern Minnesota 97 per cent of the total is rogced by mdls which cut in
excess of a million board feet each, and 99 per cent of the n o J e r n Michigan output is cut by
mills of that class. About 22 mills i Wisconsin and Michigan and 6 in New
n
land and New
York report the productibn of more than 3 million feet of birch each. Birch is cut a ong with other
species as it comes in the stand. HOW1 0
is the rule, although some of the larger operators use steam. The lar est producers run railroad operations. Logging in the birch region is
c b e d on during most o the year. Birch lumber is ordinarily plain sawed and the largest and
best logs are saved for veneer. Under normal conditions, from 25 to 30 million feet a year
is used for this purpose. The bi mills both in the North and in the Appalachian region use
considerable care i ading their%mber.
n
It is estimated t a t 12 per-cent of .the cut wiU grade h t s and seconds, 8 inches or wider,
and that possibly 33 per cent d be sultable for propellers. Fmts and seconds make up 14 or
15 per cent of the total output in the Lake States, and No. 1 common about 25 per cent.

"
i

f

%

MARKETS AND USES FOB THE LUMBER.

Practicall the entire cut of birch i further manufactured. Planing-mill products, includs
ing Gnish, s a d and doors, and similar products, take ?S per cent of it. Furniture including
f
chairs, takes 17.7 per cent and uses a 1ar er quanhty o blrch than of any other woods except oak,
maple, and red gum. The s 001 and b s b i n indust uses 6.9 er cent of the birch cut, a quaneater than that of d o t h e r woods combine2 Of all L c h cut, 6 1 per cent goes into
.
2;gnware and novelties; 3.2 per. cent i t Sxturq; 3 per cent i t vehicles; 2.7 per cent into
no
no
musical instruments; 2.1 er cent mto handles; 1.7 mto dowela; and 1.6 per cent into boot and
shoe findings. Uany ot er industnes use smaller amounts. The box and crate industry,
which probably uses the
ater part of the low-grade lumber as well as some of higher grades,
absorbs 18.9 per cent of t e tot$.
The greater part of the output of birch lumber is sold and used in regions fairly close to the
places where it is produced.

B
f?

.

40

ANXUAL REPORT XATIOXAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

BLACK CHERRY.
(Prunua serotina).
DISTILUBUTION.

Black cherry occurs from Nova Scotia to Dakota, south to Florida and Arizona, and alop
the mountains to South America. It was formerly abundant and of considerable commercia
importance in the Appalachian region from West Virginia to Alabama, but is nowhere abundant .
now.
USE I AIBCRAFT.
N
Cherry wood is strow fairly hard, straight grained, works well, and takes a fine h i s h ;
consequently it is an excegent propeller wood. It is also good for plywood facing. The SUPply is so small, however, that this species can probably never be of great importance to the airplane industry.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.
Available estimates of the supply of standing black cherry timber are only rough guesses
based on the amouqts known to exist in a few localities. There is supposed to be between 400
and 500 million feet: all together. Cherry usually occurs scattered as single trees in mixed hardwood forests and along roads and fences. It is estimated that about 100 million feet is in New
En land and New York, 200 million in the,southern A alachians, and 100 million in the centr af woodlot region. Probably there is more cherr$ EFt in West Virginia than in any other
State. New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, ennessee, North Carolina, and Kentucky
are b o supposed to have considerable quantities. A few large virgin tracts in the mountains
still contain considerable amounts of cherry, but by far the greater part of the supply is in the
hands of a multitude of small omers.

Ei

+RODVCTION OF'LUMBER

The average annual cut of black cherry lumber in recent years has been less than 10 million
ia cuts the most. Other States that
board feet, and it is steadily decreasing.
west
produce considerable quantities are: Pennsylvania, em York, North Carolina, Indiana, Tennessee, iMichigan, Ohio, and Virginia. About 20 States all report some cherry cut.
Cherr forms only a very small art of the cut of most of the mills that saw it. I t is cut by a
large num er of both lar e and sm& mills, very few of which cut large uantities.
It is estimated that &om 15 to 25 per cent of the cut grades h t s an seconds, most of which
would be suitable for propellers.
USES FOR THE LUMBER
Cherry is a valuable cabinet wood, and practically the entire cut is further manufactured.
Eighteen per cent goes into fixtures. Seventeen per cent goes into printing material (backing)
this industry using more cherry than any other five woods combined. Car construction uses for
finish 16 per cent of the cherry lumber cut. Fourteen per cent goes into planing-mill products;
6 per cent into professional and scientific instruments; 5& er cent into furniture; 5 per cent into
handles; 4 er cent into brushes. Musical instruments, c ocks, boats, fancy boses, and patterns
take consi&rable quantities.

+

g

8

P

ELM.

Thia apedes ia &O

CORK ELM (Ulmua racemosu).
known as rock elm, cork-bark elm, and hickory elm.

WHITE ELM (Ulmua umeriuzna).
This species k also known as American elm, mater elm, and g a y elm.
SLIPPERY ELM ( Ulmua pubescens).
This species k also known aa red elm and rock elm.
WING ELM (Utmtu ahta).
Thia species ia also known aa wahoo,witch elm, cork elm, small-leavedelm, red elm, water elm, and mountain elm.
CEDAR ELM ( U h u a cruss~olia).

T i species is also known as red elm and basket elm.
hs
DISTRLBUTION.

Cork elm occurs from eastern Quebec, throush northern New Hampshire and Vermont,
to Michigan, Wisconsin, northeastern Nebraska, Mwsouri,and middleTennessee. It is commercially important chiefly in northeastern Wisconsin and adjacent parts of up eriWcchigan. White
elm occurs from southern Newfoundland to the eastern base of the Rocky b u n t a i n s and south
to Texas and Florida. Commercially it is most important in Michigan, Wisconsin, Indiana, and

SUPPLIES AND PRODUC!ITON OF AIIlCRdFT WOOD&

41

lL

0
v,

K
w

(D
c

0
z

Q

4

E

.

.

,

42

AXNU& REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

the lower Mississippi Valle
Slippery elm has almost the same range as white elm, but does
not extend quite so far nort or south. Wing elm occurs in the Atlantic coast regionfrom southern Virginia to Florida, and in the lower Mississippi and tributary valleys from southern Illinois
to Texas. Cedar elm occurs from Mississippi through Louisiana, southern Arkansas,. and most
of the wooded part of Texas.
USE IN AXRCRAFI'.

%.

E m is slightly heavier than ash and rather low in stiflness but very tough and shoock-rel
sistant. It steam bends very well and may be substituted for ash in longerons and for sunllar
uses. It is also used for other bent work, such as landinv skids and flyin-boats' keels. Cork
elm has been approved for propellers. White elm is usexfor bent plywooa
Individual pieces of slippery and white elm of the same density as cork elm have the same
properties; therefore, the species is a less important consideration than the density. Shp ery
elm is on the average lighter than cork elm, and white elm is lighter and less stiff. All ofthe
elms require care in drying because of their tendency to warp and to twist.
very limited, this species probably has no future as a proThe su ply of cork elm be'
eller w o o l On the other h a 2 the su p1 of all the elms take6 together is comparatively
f&e and accessible, and growth is rapiz; txerefore, elm for bent work and plywood may be
used io increasing quantities.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER
Elm grows scattered in mixed stands with other hardwoods, and does not form pure
stands. It is a very common and widely distributed field and roadside tree. White elm reaches
diameten of 6 feet or more at maturity. Cork elm occasionally reaches diameten of 3 feet, while
slippery elm and cedar elm are somewhat smaller, and wing elm is rarely 2 feet in diameter.
Forest-grown cork elms are fre nentl free of branches for 60 feet from the ground.
Such estimates as are availa de o the total stand of elm do not separate the species. It is
jud ed that there is about 16 billion feet of elm standinq. The States with the largest sup lies
of e L are, in the order named: Arkansas, Missouri, Michigan, Louisiana, Mississip i, and #isconsin. These six States have two-thirds of the total stand. I n New England an New York
there is slightly less than 1 billion feet,in the Lake States nearly 4 billion feet, in the Mississi pi
valley 8 billion feet, and in the central woodlot re$on 3 billion feet. It has been estimated t a t
from one-fourth to one-third of the elm cut in Wmonsin, 5 per cent of that cut in lower Michigan, and 20 er cent of that cut in upper Michigan is cork elm. There is probably about 300
million feet o cork elm standing in these States, which have nearly all of the supply of this species that is commercially important. While most of the remaining forest-grown elm, and probably practically all of the forest-grown cork elm is in large holdings owned by land and lumber
companies, a large part of the total stand of elm is held by small owners. Much of it, especially
in the lower Mississippi region, is on land that will be cleared for agriculture.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.
During the years 1913 to 1917 the average annual cut of elm lumber was about 215 million
feet, which is 60 million feet less than the average cut during the preceding six years. The cut
is gradually but quite.steadily decreasing. Wisconsin and Michi an together produce one-half
of the total; following them come Indiana, Arkansas, Ohio, an Missouri.. These six States
report more than three-fourths of the total. Twenty mills in the North (Minnesota, Wisconsin,
Nchigan, Indiana) reported cuts of elm for 1917 in excess of 1 million feet; fifteen in the lower
Mississippi valley reported similar cuts. From 15 to 20 million feet of elm veneer, not included
in the lumber cut, is also produced each year, bcsides about 150 million feet of slack cooperage
material. The annual production of cork elm lumber is about 13) million feet, of which 10
million feet is cut in Wisconsin, nearly all in Shawano, Langlade, and Forest Counties. and 31
million feet in Michigan. About half the elm cut in the three Wisconsin counties named is cork
elm. Elm lumber forms only a minor part of the total cut of the larger mills reporting, as few, if
any, of them make any special effort to get elm except as they happen upon it in the courss of
logging.
8
Practically all elm logs are plain sawed. From 1 to 20 per cent of the cork elm cut grades
firsts and seconds, admitting widths as narrow as 4 inches, and from 24 to 30 or cent rades
No. 1 c o h o n . The total amount of plain-sawed, straight grained, clear cork e m, suita le for
propellers, that can bc obtained from tlie present ulizaml cut,it is estimated, will not exceed about
200 thousand board feet. This is only about 13 per cent of the total cut. It is probable, however, that a much larger proportion, possibly from 15 to 20 per cent, will be suitable for other
parts of aircraft. Becauw of the larger average size of the logs, an even greater part of the cut
of white elm may be available for thoss USPS to which this s ecics is adapted, including .the
making of veneers. A comparatively small percentage of it wi be of sufficient density to make
longeron stock.

7 9

B

P

i

P

9

H

I
,

43

SUPPLIES AED PRODUCTIOX OF A I R C W WOODS.

MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBFB.

,

T

’

i .

At least 90 per cent of the elm lumber cut is further manufactured before it reaches the consumer. Wenty-sk per cent goes i t boxes and crates; 14 per cent into furniture (principally
no
chairs, for which more elm is used than any other wood except maple and beech) ; 123 per cent
into vehicles; 64 per cent into musical instruments; 5 per cent into refrigerators and kitchen
cultural implements; and 24 per cent into trunks (especially slats). .
cabinets; 3 per cent into
Smaller quantities are use for a great variety of products.
This wood is practically all used in t eNorthern and Eastern States, and the industries which
h
A
take the largest amounts of *elm are usually located fawly close to the sources of suppl
great deal of t e cooperage material is manufactured into hished productg in the g u t h ,
h
h
near t e places where it is cut.
A large part of the cork elm produced i used in vehicles, for hubs, bows, parts of the runs
n n gear, automobile bodies, logging-wheel s okes, sleigh rumera, and camage-whgel rims.
ig
Some is used for chair rockers, stepladders, Pedder rungs,plow handles, scythe snaths, and
many other articles.

,

‘

-

HICKORY.

SHAGBARK HICKORY (Hiconk ovata). SHELLBARK HICKORY (HieOria tmiwm). PIGNUT HICKORY
L k r u gZah). MOCKERNUT HICKORY (HiooFia alba). BITTERNUT. HICKORY (Hieoria mznzmu).
Hoi
Hen
ATER HICKORY ( B h & aquuth). NUTMEG HICKORY ( z o a mymtuqfonna.9). PECAN HICKORY ( H e pecan).
There are several other hickoj Bpecies of minor importance, but the greater part of the lumber cut is from the
tirst five specks.
DISTBIBUTION.

Shagbark hickory occurs from southern Maine through southern Quebec and Ontario
to southern Minnesota and eastern Nebraska, and south to Delaware, and alon the Appalachians to western Florida and Texas. It is most abundant on the western s opes of the
southern Appalachians and in the lower Ohio V d e . Shellbark hickor is found from central Mew York to eastern Nebraska, and south to d r t h Carolina and 0 ahoma, and is most
abundant in the bottom lands of central Missouri and the lower Ohio Basin. Pignut occurs
from southern Maine to Nebraska and south to the Gulf of Mexico. It is most abundant in
Missouri and Arkansas, and grows to largest size in the lower Ohio River Basin. Mockernut
occurs from southern Ontario to Kansas and south to Florida and Texas, and is abundant in
the lower Ohio Valley, Missouri, Arkansas, and the South Atlantic and Gulf cpstal regions. Bitternut covers about the same range as igaut, except that it is not found qwte so far south. It
is abundant in all of the Central and &ortheastern States, and is the most common hickory of
Iowa, Pu’ebraska, Kansas, and southern New England. Water hickory grows in swamps of
the coastal plain from southern Virginia to Texas and up the Mississippi Valley to southern
Illinois. It is most abundant in Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi. Nutmeg hickory is
found from South Carolina to Mexico, and is most abundant in southern Arkansas. Pecan
occurs in the Mississippi Valley from Iowa to Texas, east to southern Indiana and central Alabama, and west to eastern K n a and Oklahoma.
ass

7

&

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Wood of the first four species named above has been suggested as a possible substitute
for ash in longerons, since it is tough and strong, though heavier than ash. So f a r as known,
hickory has not been used for longerons. It is used to some extent for landing skids. The
other species are less shock resistant and considerably inferior to these four.

-

and their

n
lion feet i the southern
and 7 billion feet in the
of hickory are, in about

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

44

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITfEE FOB AERONAUTICS.

SUPPLIES AXD PRODUCTION OF -CRAFT

WOODS.

45

Carolina, Louisiana, Mississi pi, Alabama, and West V i a . These nine States have about
two-thirds of the total Stan2
The standing hcko is in the possession of a considerable number of large owners tis well
as of a multitude of sm er holders. It is a very common and widel scattered wood-lot tree,
and occurs in large quantities on the holdings of lumber companies tgoughout the South.

f3;

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

A large part of the hick0 used in the United States does not go through regular saw.mills, but is cut directly into Tanks, squares, or billets, which axe manufactured into spokes,
handles, rims, and other pro ucts. For this reason the census @ p e s on the roduction of
hickory lumber do not gwe a sum anywhere near the total production of kckory used
in the industries. During the years 1913 to 1917 the average cut of hickory lumber was about
120 million board feet, and this is less than half the average annual cut from 1907 to 1912,
which was 254 million feet. The cut is steadily declinin . .
Arkansas, Tennessee, West Virginia, Mississippi, 3fentuck Indiana, and Ohio lead in
the production of hickory lumber, and to ether roduce neaxc three-fourths of the total.
Missmippi, Ohio, Louisiana, Missouri, and ennsy vania are also important produc'
"ghStates.
Hckory from virgin forests such as are found in the southern Ap alachans and in t e lower
Mississippi region, is cut in considerable quantities b large harzwood mills, which take it
dong rmth their other timber. The .great bulk of t e hickory production, however, comes
from small or medium-sized mills. Many small operators specialize on hickory squares and
billets, which are not recorded in lumber census re orts. For the year 1917, only six mills
reported cuts of more than a million board feet o hickory lumber, while about 150 reported
cuts between 100 thousand and 1 million feet.
The proportion of the hickory cut that would be suitable for airplane work depends very
largely upon the sizes in which it would be wanted. For short, narrow strips, such as are used
for skids, a very large part of the cut would be suitable.

2

%

P

z

P

V

I

I

T

S AND USES FOB THE LUMBER.

.

Available Sgures on the amounts of hickory used ;bout six years ago by various .industries indicate a total consumption of 390 maion board feet, which is 50 per cent, or 130
million feet, in excess of the average lumber cut for the five years previous to that time. The
total cut of hickory lumber has fa3len off to about 40 er cent of what it was then, but it is
not known whether or not the total consumption of Eckory has fallen off to the'same extent
Of the total of 390 million feet, 62 per cent was used by the vehicle industry, which took
more hickory than any other wood, and, with the exception of oak, more hickory than a other
U
woods combined. Handle manufacturers used 31 er cent uf the total. Forty-three per cent
of all wood used for handles was hickory. A y x f i u r a l implements took about 2) per cent,
athletic goods, 1) per cent, and numerous ot er industries, small quantities.
Most of the hckory cut is used in the woodworking centers of the Central and Eastern
States. In 1913 about 8 million feet of hickory in the log was exported, and ti went chiefly
hs
to Canada, South Africa, Aystralia, and Germany.
SUGAR MAPLE.
( A m sacelunum.)

Thk, species is ala0 known aa hard maple, rock maple, and black maple.

DISTRIBUTION.

The rangeof sugar maple extends from southern Newfoundland to Minnesota, and south to
eastern Texas and northwestern Florida. It is of commercialimportance chiefl in the Lake
States, the Northeast, and along the Appalachian Range to northern Georgia. d e best maple
comes from Michigan, especially from the lower peninsula.
USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Sugar maple, being uite heavy, hard, stiff,resistant to wear, and of uniform texture, is a
fairly satisfactory pro ejer wood, and has been so used where the requirements were not too
exacting. Because o the same qualities it makes excellent face ply and finish. It has also
been approved for bent work, sluds, and enaine bearers. Its comparative abundance, wide
distribution, accessibility, and comparative Aeapness promise for it an important future in
. airplane manufacture.

P

.

46

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

47

SUPPLIES AND PRODUCTION OF ALRCRAFT WOODS.

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Sugar maple occurs scattered sing1 or in groups through ‘mixed stands of hardwoods,
most important of which are birch, beect, and basswood, and in stands of hemlock and white
pine. It seldom forms a large proportion of the stand, except over very limited areas. Matuee
trees ordinarily run from 30 to 40 inches in diameter and from 100 to 120 feet in height, often
with clear boles of 60 feet or more when grown in the forest. Most of the maple is so situated
that it can be logged without any great di-fficulty,although much of it is not tributary to existing mills. It has been estimated that between 10 and 15 per cent of the remaining stand will
be cut in operations now in progress.
Accurate data on the total stand of ma le timber are lacking, as is the case with most of
our species. The best available estimates ingcate that there is between 40 and 50 billion board
feet of merchantable size (including both sugar ma le and thesoft maples), of which one-fourth
is in Michigan, and nearly three-fourths in the fopowing nine States: Michigan, New York,
Missouri, Maine, Wisconsin, Arkansas, Ohio, Vermont, and Pennsylvania. I n Missouri and
Arkansas soft maple is prevalent; in the other States named, su ar maple predominates. About
12 billion feet is standing in New England and New York, 15 b’ ‘on feet in the Lake States, and
fll
0 billion feet in the Appalachian region.
While there is a large quantity of maple in the aggregate on farmers’ woodlots and similar
small holdings in the ma le region, most of it is more or less open- rown, short-boled timber
which will not produce a arge proportion of airplane material. Pro ably the reater part of
i
l
such material w l come from wqin forest stands such as exist in northern New%ngland, ?Jew
York, the Lake States, and along the Appalachians, and are largely owned in fair-sized blocks
-- .
by lumber or land companies. -

9

%

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The annual cut of maple lumber in the United States averaged from 1913 to 1917, inclusive,
about 900 million board feet, of which it is estimated about 80 per cent was sugar maple. The
cut from 1907 to 1912 averaged a little less than a billion feet a year. While there is , therefore,
a gradual decline in production, the rate is still quite well maintained. Forty er cent of the
cut comes from Michigan and seven-tenths from the three States of Michigan, kisconsin, and
West Virginia. I n Michigan and Wisconsin more than 95 per cent of the cut is made by large
mills whose production is in exceq of one million feet of maple each; in West Virginia about 80
per cent is cut by such mius. The larger concerns, as a rule, grade their lumber more carefull
than the smaller ones and are better equipped to turn out well-manufactured, high-gra e
material in quantity.
Logging IS carned on throughout the year in most operations, and horse logging is the
rule, although a few of the larger operators use steam. Radroads are employed in many of the
large enterprises.
The roportion of the cut which is suitable for use in aircraft depends, of course, upon the
pu ose
whichit iswanted. It is estimated that about 3 per cent will be of the size and
qu%ty suitable for propellers if plain-sawed material is used, or 1 to 13 per cent if quartersawed material is required. About 15 per cent of the entire cut, or of that part of it produced
by larger mills a t least, is in the two u per grades of firsts and seconds, while about 25per cent
is No. 1 Common. From 30 to 40 m d o n feet of maple is normally cut into veneer.

d

gr

MARKETS AND USES FOR TEE LUMBER.

.

More than 90 per cent of the cut of maple lumber is further manufactured. Perhaps the
most important use of high- rade su ar maple is for flooring. Of the total cut of all species of
maple, 31.6 er cent is ma e into p aning mill roducts, including flooring. I n quantity, the
maple man,P
actured by planing mills is exceede among hardwoods only by oak. Of the ma le
lumber cut, 13.5 per cent is utilized for furniture and chairs, and the amount of it used for &is
.
pur ose is exceeded only by oak. For boot and shoe findings, 5 4 per cent of the maple cut is
hs
use$. T i is 81 per cent of all the lumber taken by this industry and does not include the large
amount of maple so used without being cut into lumber. I n the making of agricultural implements 4.8 per cent of the maple cut is employed. Oak and yellow pine are the only woods used
more extensively in this industry than maple. More maple than any other wood is utilized in
making musical instruments, the ercentage being4.5 of the total cut. For the manufacture of
handles. 4.1 per cent of the map e cut is taken, and only hickory and ash are used in larger
amounts than maple in this industry. I n the making of vehicles, and especially for the framework of trucks andnutomobiles, 3.6 per cent of the maple cut is employed. Two per cent of
the maple cut is made into fixtures, and oak is the only wood used more largely than ma le for
this purpose. Large quantities are used for woodenware, laundry appliances, spools an bob-

f

P

B

P

ti

*

-

18

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOB AEEONAUTICS.

bins, refriyeraton, car construstion, tranks, sporting goods (exceeded only by hickory), rofessional and scientific instruments (exceeded only by cedar used for pencils), and toys. %he
box and crate industry uses 96 per cent of the cut.
.
Maple flooring is sold all over the country. The maple used by the various industries is
sold largely in the Central and Northeastern States where these industries are centered; conse
quently, very long railroad hauls are not ordinarily nece3sary.

OAKS.
WHITE OAKS: WFITEO I K (&4+?rcw a l h ) . P a 3 ~
OAK (Quercus minor). BUROAK(Quercun macrocarpa). Cow
OAK
O ~ Quercus michauxii). OVERCUP (Querctis lyratu). CEIESTXUT OAK(QiLercus prinus).
K
RED OA(ks : REDOAK (Quercus rubra or boredis). TEXAN
OAK (Quercus texana). PIN OAK (Quercus aluslris).
ScAmsr OAK(Quercus c0cche.s). YELLOW BLACK)
(or
(Qitercus velutina). WILLOW (Quercun phedn).
OAK
Thew twelve speciea furnish the Fester part of the oak lumber cut in the United States. A few other species in
each group furnish small quantities.
DISTIUBUTION.

Taken together, the s ecies named are widely distributed throughout the United States
east of the Great Plains. Eumerous species of scrub oaks of little or no value €or lumber ocqur
in the southern Rocky Mountain, Gfeat Basin,. and Pacific coast regions, while several species
that do produce some lumber occur in Califorma and Ore on.
White oak occurs from southern Maine to southern Sfichigan, southern Minnesota, eastern
Nebraska, and Kansas, and south-to Texas and Florida. It is most abundant and of greatest
of
commercial in ortance on the i=A&~~%!opes the southern Appalachians and in the lower Ohio
Valley bottodands. Post oak occurs from southern Massachusetts to Florida and west to Missouri and Texas, and is of greategt commercial importance on d uplands of the Mississippi basin.
Bur oak occurs from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to sout ern Manitoba and eastern Montana, and south to central New England, Pennsylyania, central Tenncssee, and Texas. It is of
greatest cornmercial im ortance in southern Indiana, IllinoB, and Wssouri. Cow oak occurs
on bottomlands in the cSbastal Plain and Mississippi Valley regions from Delaware to Texas and
northward as far as southern Illinois and Indiana. It is of greatest commercial importance in
the lower Mississippi Valle
The range of overcup oak extends from Maryland through southern Indiana to southern L s o u r i and south to Florida and Texas. It is most abundant in
the lower Mississi i Valley and Gulf regions. Chestnut oak occurs in the Ap alachiap regoion
central New rngland to Alabama, and is most important commercidy m t e Carolmas and
rennessee.
Red oak ranges from Nova Scotia to north of Lake HuTon, central Kansas, and along the
mountains to Georgia. It is commercially important cbefly in t.he Northeastern States.
Texan oak occurs in. the Miissippi Valley from Iowa to Texas and up the Atlant.ic coast to
North Carolina, and IS of greatest commercial importance on the lower Mississip i bottomlands.
Pin oak occurs from southwestern New England to southern Wisouri antsouthward to
Virginia, Kentucky, and northern Arkansas, and is most abundant in the lower Ohio basin.
Scarlet oak occurs from southern Mane to Nebraska, south to Illinois and the District of
Columbia, and dona the mountains to North Carolina. I t is most abundant in the Atlantic
coRgt region from &?assachusetts to southern New deney. Ye!low oak occuas from southern
Mane to central Minnesota, and southward to northern Florida and eastern Texas. It is
common throughout most.of its range. Willow oak grpws in bottomlands of the Coastal
Plain region from Staten Island to Texas and up the Musissippi Valley to Missouri and Kentucky.

x

'

K

!ram

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

The white oaks shrink and swell with the weather less than do the red oaks. They glue
well, finish well, and are very strong. The first four species named have long been approved
as propeller woods. For propellers, quarter-sawed material IS considered much superior to
plam-sawed, because it shnnks less in a radial direction. There has been, so far, considerable
rejudice against southern-grown white oaks. Wbcthcr this prejudice is justified is not yet
fu11, known, but, with im roved technique in the drying and working of lumber from these
specxes it is robable that t ey may make satisfactory propeller woods.
The r d o a k s have not so f a r been used to any extent for propellers. It is possible, however,
that selected, quaxtered red oak, at least of t.he nort.hern species, may be found satisfactory:
There is considerable vLation in the strength pro erties of red oak lumber, even of one species.
Moreover, red oak is more likely to be defedve t an white oak.
White oak of the four approved species has also been approved for structural and bent
work on wings and fuselages.

1

R

/---

,

-

SUPPLIES A.ND PRODUCTION OF ILIBCWT WOODS.

49

50

ANNUAL REPORT NA'IZONAL ADVISORY COMMlTTEE FOR AERONAU'IZCS.

SUPPLY OF TIMBEa

Oak occurs throughout most of its range on nearly all sites except the highest ?lopes and
ridges. In the extreme northern part of the United States it does not make up an Important
proportion of the stand; but the soportion of oak increases to the southward, and from southern New England and the Centraf States to the G l the oaks are a very important part of the
uf
hardwood forests. In much of the region there 19 more oak t h m all other hardwood s eci?s
combined. Thus the oak lumber cut m the States of Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, IlEnols,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Texas exceeds the cut of all other hardwoods,
l
while there is almost as much oak cut aa a l other hardwoods combined in New Jersey, Pennsylvama, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, West Virginia, Ohio, Indiana, and Arkansas.
Only very rough estimates o the stand of oak are available, and these do not distinguish
f
the different s ecies. It has been judged that about 47 er cent of the volume of all oaks belongs in the w 'te oak group, and 53 er cent in the redoa group. White oak pro er comprises
nearly 22 per cent of the total, a n 8 the four species that have been approved or propellers
constitute ap roximately one-third of the total stand of oak, which is estimated to be between
150 and 175 Killion board feet.
About 40 per cent of the stand of oak is in the lower Mississippi Valle region, 25 er cent
ot
in the southern Appalachain region, and 15 per cent in the central wood r region. kven in
the Northeast and 111 the woodlot region, there are still some virgin stands of oak, which have
been preserved for various reasons. Most of the old-growth oak, however, is now in the South.

E

P

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

During the period'l913 to 1917 the average annual cut of oak lumber of all species was
approximately 3 billion board feet, which is 800 million feet less than the average cut during
the preceding six years. The general tendency indicates a steady decline in the roduZtion of
oak, as the virgin supplies becomamore nearly exhausted. L s than half as mu& oak lumber
es
was produced in 1917 as in 1907. Beside3 the oak sawed into lumber, a great deal that is fit
for lumber is sawed into ties, rived into staves, or used for veneer. From 30 to 50 million feet
of white oak is made into veneer every year, while the white oak hewed into ties would roduce
from 500 to 1,000 million board feet of lumber. Nearly half of the oak lumber is pro uced in
West V i n i a , Tennessee, Arkansas, and Kentucky, and eight-tenths of the total comes from
these States together with V i a , Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and
Ohio.
More than half of the sawmill9 in the United States saw oak lumber. These include the
very smallest mills as well as some of the largest. For the year 1917,22 mills in the southern
Ap alachian region and 16 in the lower Mississippi Valley region reported cuts of more than 5
m&on feet of oak each, while some 330 reported cuts of between 1 and 5 million feet each.
Most of these mills cut other species as well as oak; a few make oak a specialty.
Logging in most of the oak region is carried on during the greater part of the year, though
more timber is cut in the fall and winter than during the spring and summer months. The small
operators and many of the larger ones use animals for logging, and haul logs to their mills by
wagon, truck, or rail. Many of the large concerns in the South log with steam, and most of
them operate log,@ng railroads. A few establishments, particularly in the farming sections,
buy logs from farmers and contractors.
It has been estimated that at the present time about 58 er cent of the oak lumber cut is
white oak. Of this about 27 per cent i cut into sawed ties an large timbers, and 20 per cent of
s
the remainder grades firsts and seconds. To get quarter-sawed material 8 inches or more wide,
such as is wanted for propellers, logs 23 inches or more in diameter are required. Approximately
15 per cent of the firsts and seconds cut b the larger mills will make quarter-sawed pro eller
material. About two-thirds of the white oag is cut by these larger mills, the very small milfs not
being equipped for quarter-sawing. On this basis, about 0.85 of 1 per cent of the total oak
lumber cut will be suitable for pro ellers. Of course, the proportion of such material produced
by Merent operators will vary
Mills that buy selected logs can cut a very much higher
proportion than those that cut their own logs as they come to them.

B

'

dl

withy.

MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

American oak lumber is sold all over the United States and in many foreign countries.
During the fiscal year 1913,in round numbers, 3 million feet of oak logs and 300 million feet
of oak lumber was exported from the country. By far the greater art of the oak used in the
- United States is soId m the territory east of the Mississippi and norti of the Ohio and Potomac
. .
Rivers.

51

SUPPLIES AXD PXODUCTIOR OF dIBCBdFT WOODS.

Nearly 40 per cent of it oes into ties, timbers, and rough lumber; 18 per cent into furniture;
16 per cent into planing mil products (flooring, interior finish, etc.); about 10 per cent .(chiefly
low-grade material) into boxes and crates; 7 per cent into vehicles; 2 per cent each into agri-

P

cultural implements, fixtures, and railway cars; 1 er cent each into shipbuilding and refrigerators; and smaller amounts into most of the other in uwtries which use wood.
High-grade white oak of large sizes, which will yield propeller material, i cut largely into
s
lumber for furniture, railway cars, and shipbuilding, or into veneers. A considerable quantity,
particularly in the South, is rived into staves for tight cooperage.

!
i

YELLOW POPLAR
(

tlph.
uiyl)

This epeciea is also known as tulip poplar, tuli tree, white wood, and hickory poplar. Cucumber (Maqnolh
ncumimta) and evergreen ma olia (X.e i & , whic1 are usually cut and sold with p o p k and have about the came
f t.)
o
atrength propsrtiea, are inclugd with it i the following diaamion.
n
DISTBI[BUTION.

Yellowpoplar occurs in all States east of the Mississippi River exce t Maine, New Hanipshire, Vermont, and Wisconsin, and occurs also in Missouri, Arkansas, and ouisiana. Cucumber
does not occur quite so f a r to the northeast and to the south as poplar. Evergreen magnolia
is found principally in the southern Atlantic and Gulf coast regions. V i n stands of. poplar
containing large-sized timber are now to a considerable extent confined to the A palachian
region southward from Pennsylvania, and to bottomlands of Tennessee, Georgia, an Alabama.

E

J

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Yellow oplar has been used with satisfactor results for most of the wooden parts of
aircraft. d i l e a little heavier than spruce and . erior to it in shock resistance, it is comparatively strong, free from checks and shake, retains its shape well, and is easy to work. It is a
fairly satisfactory substitute for spruce in making wing beams and struts, as well as for wing
ribs, and has been used to some extent for propellers,. particularly by the French. It makes
excellent cores for plywood and has been so utilized m considerable quantities.
Its wide distribution, its accessibility, its occurrence within easy reach of centers of aircraft
poplar a very mportant species
manufacture, as well as its excellent qualities, make yellow - for aircraft construction.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

J

Yellow poplar never occurs in pure stands over considerable areas, but ap ears as scattered
individuals or groups in forests of mixed hardwoods, or of hardwoods and emlock, pine, or
occasionally' spruce. In the southern Appalachians, the region of its greatest abundance, it
constitutes from 10 to 30 per cent of the stand in virgin timber, or from 1to 3 thousand board-feet
per acre over extensive areas. Occasionally single acres have been reported having as much as
i5,OOO board feet. I n the bottomlands farther south a smaller proportion of the staDd is poplar.
In virgin stands trees average from 30 to 36 inches -in diameter, with 50 to 60 feet clear of
branches; diameters of 6 feet are by no means rare.
Poplar is a-tree of the lower and middle slopes and coves, and, therefore, to a considerable
extent IS in fairly accessible places. However, part of the revion where it grows is not yet
provided with road or railroad facilities, and it i estimated &at not more than half of the
s
remaining virgin stand is accessible to existing sawmills.
The total amount of standing poplar is not known. Rough estimates place it a t about
99 billion board feet, of which perhaps 7 billion feet is vir& timber. Three-fourths of the
total stand is in the States of West Virginia, North Carolina, 'fennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia.
All but a few million feet is in private ownership. The greater part of the remaining virgin
timber is in fairly large holdings of lumber companies, coal companies, and land investment
owth stands are held by the large companies and by many small owners
companies.
in H e r e n t parts of t e poplar region.

f

Second-r

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The annual cut of yellow poplar lumber from 1913 to 1917 averaged 450 million board
feet, and is steadil declming. About one-half as much is now cut each year as was produced
ten years ago. d s t Virginia now produces one-fourth of the total, and is followed by Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia, Virginia, North Carolina, and Alabama, in the order named. These
States produce more than 90 per cent of the total cut.

52

ANNUAL REPORT XATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR PLERONAUTICS.

0
(
u

d

Z

LL

a

H

. .

53

SUPPLIES AND PBODUCTIOPP OF AXWEAFT WOODS.

About oneahhall of the total is cut by large, well-equipped mills of which there are approximatel 75 cutting more than one million fee.t-6f PO lar each. Another one-fourth of the total
is cut y some 350 medium-sized or large mds, eac of whch cuts in excess of 100,OO~
Yl
board
feet of poplar. Small mills cut the rest, mostly from second-growth stands which produce
very little high-grade lumber. Except for a few whch buy logs and specialize on oplar, all
of these mills cut a variety of species, and take poplar only as it comes in the stan$. Of the
lumber cut by the 75 largest roducers, 18 per cent was poplar, and by the smaller producers,
about 7 er cent. On the aais of their rated capacity and these proportions of poplar,
lar e m d are capable of producing 275 million feet of poplar, while the medium-sized mills
colfsd roduce 150 million feet. The smaller + which now,cut less than 100 thousand feet
,
of PO
each, could probably produce 100mdhonfeet a year If operate? to the= tu11 capacity
the present rate of cuttmng, the existing larger rmlls have sufficient standmg poplar
last them, on the avqrage, fr0.m 10 to 12 years. It,seems robable that, after the next 15 to 20
years, almoat the entire cut @ come from small &.and
argely from secondLogging is now done w t s t y m qwte geneplly m the southern art of t e poplar reglon,
ih
whilo horses are commonly used in West Virgmia. Practically a l o the large operations em;
l
. A few o erators use motor trucks to some extent to bring in lo , and several
along t e Ohio River, depend upon water trans ortation. gperations are
carried on throu hqut the year, althou h it IS customary to try to pg the greater part of the
poplar in fall an mmter, on account of t e tendency of logs to sapstain when they arecut during
the summer. Logs are seldom cut more than 19 feet in length, though longer ones can be gotten
out by the larger o eratoq when such material 19 wanted.
Under norma conditlonq no particular effort is made to saw straight-grained material, but
the larger roducers use considepble care to saw lumber of the upper grades. Poplar is characteristica y straight grained, wlth littlo taper, so that robably 75 per cent of the clear lumber
produced has ain straight enough to make it suitable or lurcraft use.
e
&lostof t%p wrplane material wdl, probably come from the upper grade?, inclu$F ye!,
wide No. 1: firsts and seconds, .and sap3 and selects. The pro ortlon of thls mater1 t a t is
produced varies widely wlth d?fferent ptands and regions. T i e average figure for the large
mills is about-26 per cent, and it is estimated &at perhaps 75 per cent of t+ amount will be
suitable for arplanes. Probably not more than 5 or 6 per cent of the material from secondwowth stands will meet prosent airplane standards. It is 'udged that approximately 60 million
d l
goard feet of the resent cut of 350 million feet will f d the requirements for airplane work
if it iq sawed to t e desired sizes.
In addition to the above lumber cut, from 25 to 35 million fee$ of ellow poplar, chiefly
s
high-grade material, i ordinarily cut into veneer each year. Much of t&s is suitable for airplane plywood.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.
Practically the entire cut of yellow poplar is further manufactured, and it & used by a very
great variety of industries. Thirty-three er cent of the cut is made into sash, doors, finish,
siding, and other planing mill products. For furniture, includmg chairs, 74 per cent isused.
Seven per cent goes into vehicles, and only hickory and oak are used in largerquantitiesby this
industry. Six er cent is employed in m a h g musical instruments. In this iudustry, ma le
is the onl woo more largely used than poplar. For car construction, 43 er cent of the pop ar
cut is ta en, and oak is the on1 hardwood more estensively employeb: In manufacturing
bungs and faucets, 23 per cent of t e poplar is utilized-86:per cent of all the wood used by this
industry. Two per cent IS made into fixtures, and the same amount into agricultural implements. A large number of industries use smaller uantities. Box and crate manufacturers
take 23 er cent of the cut, mostly low grade materia?.
Yelpow poplar is sold in large quantities in the Central and Northeastern States, where
most of the wood-using industries are located. Considerable quantities are normally exported
to the countnes of western Europtl, in whose markets American yellow poplar is a standard wood.

t

Ikr
t

!

td

'1'

fzt$g$ks

P
P

!

cg

%

PWth

,

P

R

P

g

z s

.

P

1

BLACK WALNUT.
(Juglamnigra.)
DISTRIBUTION.

a

Black walnut occurs from southern New En land to southern Ontario, southern Minnesota,
and south to eastern Texas and Florida. It reac es its best development and is found in largest
quantities in the central woodlot re ion centering in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, eastern Iowa,
Virginia. It has also been planted to some extent
Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, and
beyond its natural range. The small quantities, limited distribution, and habits of growth of
the other black walnut s ecies, the Mexican and California walnuts, render them of no impors
tance a B source of airp ane material.
/

hest

P

.

54

ANNUAL BEPOET NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOB AERONAUTICS.

c

N

.

.

55\

SUPPLIES BND PBODUCTION OF dIBCRBFT ,WOODS.

USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Black walnut makes the best propellers of any native species. It is easy to work, finishes
well, is ve resistant to wear and to shocks, and retains its place remarkably well. It also
makes exce lent facing plywood, both flat and bent.
While, on account of the scarcity of the remain5g high-grade walnut and its consequent
high price, other woods may in' the future come to be used much more for propellers, it is likely
that walnut will always be an important wood for this purpose.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER .
Walnut has been in demand for many years for furniture, veneers, cabinet work, and gunstocks, and the once large supply was ahead greatly reduced prior to 1914. Since that year,
and particularly since 1917, the enormous Iemand for walnut for war uses has made serious
?
inroads on the remaining accessible supply.
It occurs scattered singly through stands of mixed hardwoods, and i a very common
s
field or roadside tree in the region of its best development. The cut in recent years has probably
come largely from trees grown m the open or in groves. The best trees are found in fairly
rich a ricultural soil, where the grow somewhat rapidly and reach large size. The average
trees &at remain in the more orthern States are somewhat smaller than those in the States
farther south, but are of better quality. Eight per cent of the lo now cut run between 12
and 20 inches in diameter a t the small end. $he open-grown wa nut timber is, of course
practicall all accessible, but a large part of that grown m the forest is some distance b a d
from r o a h and not easy to get at.
Estimates of the existing stand of walnut are very unsatisfactory and differ widely. The
best available figures, which probably do not allow for the greatly stimulated cut during the
past two or three ears, indicate a stand of about 850 million board feet. The eight States,
Jlissouri, Illinois, 'fennessee, Eentucky, Ohio, Arkansas, and Indiana, have about 70 per cent
of the total stand. The entire amount is distributed about as follows: Central woodlot region,
550 million feet; southern Appalachian region, 200 million feet; Gulf and Atlantic States, 100
million feet. This estimate includes all trees over 8 inches in diameter; therefore, the stand of
timber, about 16 inches in diameter and upward, that will produce airplane material, must be
very much smaller. By-far the greater part of the standing walnut is widel scattered and is
in the hands of small holders, most of whom are farmers rather than timber and owners.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.
Because of the scattered distribution of walnut and its production by a large number. of
small mills, figures on the annual cut of lumber are probably far from complete. The avera e
annual cut during several years prior to 1914 was about 40 million feet, besides considerabqe
quantities cut into veneer or exported in the log. Some 13 million feet of logs were exported
in 1913. After 1914,from 75 to 90 million feet a ear was cut and b 1918 a muchlar er amount
had been reached. It is probable that the pro uction of walnut umber will soon fall back to
the prewar figure or considerably below it. Indeed, this must happen unless the supply of
timber is much larger than the most optimistic estimates have allowed.
Some 900 mills normally cut walnut lumber along with other woods. Only about a dozen
mills ordinarily specialize on walnut to the exclusion of other species, and these probably cut
nearly half of the total. Walnut mills draw on wide sections of country for their log supply, and
have to maintain considerable forces of buyers to locate, purchase, and assemble the logs a t
shippin points. Logs are often shipped 300 miles to the mill.
W&ut lumber intended for ordinary commercial uses is generally plain sawed in order to
bring out the grain, and no particular attempt is made to saw straight-grained material. All important producers are now entirely familiar withsawing airplane material, and may be expected to
continue to saw it if there is a suf€icient demand for such material a t prices that will attract them.
I t is estimated that on the average about 18 per cent of the log scale is suitable for propeller
stock, considering only lo 12 inches and upward in diameter. At certain mills the proportion runs considerably hi Fer. In some instances this is due to greater care bein exercised
in selectin logs for purcifase, and in others to the better average quality of the wa nut that is
own in &e North. It seem likely that with the return of normal conditions the uality of
obtained will tend to deteriorate, or else the cut will fall very much below the & p e s a t
w ch it stood in recent y b m .
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBEE
Black walnut has long been valued for cabinet-making and for gunstocks. It is normally
employed in large quantities in the manufacture of sewmg machmes, musical instruments,.
furniture, interior finlsh and iktures, and for many lesser uses. It is widely utilized in the

7

;9

T

s

c9

.?*

f

gg

\

t

\
i

'\
I

56

A N N U A L REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

wood-manufacturing centers of the United States, and for many years previous to the war wits
exported, mostly in the log. The greater part of walnut exports formerly went to Germany,
and considerable quantities to Great Britain. During the war large quantities of propeller and
gunstock material were sent to the allied countries, particularly France and Great Britain.

COTTONWOOD.
COMUON COTTONWOOD (Populus deltoides)
This species is ala0 known 89 b cottonwood, yellow cottonwood, and Carolina poplar.
i
g

SWAMP COTTONWOOD (Populua heterophylla)
This apecia ie also known aa black cottonwood, river cottonwood,and swamp poplar.
These two apecies are the moat abundant and furnish the bulk of the cut.' Small amoupta of various species, including Balm of Gilead, narrow-leaf cottonwood, black cottonwood (western), aapen, and others, are also cut.

'

DISTRIBUTION.

The common cottonwood occurs over practically the entire United States east of the Rocky
Mountains, except in the extreme Northeast and in southern Florida. The swamp cottonwood
is largely confined to the Coastal Plain from Connecticut to western Louisiana,. and up the
Mississippi valley to southern Luinois and Indiana. The optirnUm region for both is the valley
of the lower Mississippi with its tributary streams.
USE IN AIRCRAFT.

Cottonwood is low in its strength properties, but i light, to uh, and fairly easy to work.
s
Furthermore, it is cheap, fairly abundant, and accessible. It hasbeen employed to some extent for lywood cores, 11f aircraft construction, and its use for this purpose may be considerably
extendex
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

,

The greater portion of the cottonwood lumber cut is from the common cottonwood. It is
found principally alo .o. streams and often in pure stands or mixed with willows over small areas.
Such stands are usu y very open. Much of the mature cottonwood is associated with ash,
soft maple, s camore, red
, tupelo, cypress, oaks, and other hardwoods, in mixed stands.
In the'lower &mksippi v a c t h e trees reach large size, with diameters of from 4 to 6 feet and
heights between 125 and 175 feet. Growth is extremely rapid and yields per acre are relatively
large. The swamp cottbnwood grows in similar situations and is cut along with the common
cottonwood.
The available estimates of the stand of cottonwood are very rough and unsatisfactory.
It has been 'udged that there is ap roximatel 10 billion board feet in trees above 8 inches in
diameter. &o-thirds of it is in Lkansas %uisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, and Oklahoma.
More than three-fourths is in the lower Missiksippi valley reoion, a little more than a billion feet
in the Coastal Plain region, and ossibly three-fourths bilgon feet in the Great Lakes region.
Most of the extensive stands of &e %issip i region are owned by large lumber companies.
The cottonwood in Kansas, Iowa, Minnesota,%mois, and Indiana is mostly in plantod groves
and owned in small units by farmers and others

3

.

PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The average annual cut of cottonwood lumber in the United States between 1913 and 1917
was 195 million board feet, which is nearly 50 million feet less than the average cut durinv the
preceding six years. In addition, large amounts of cottonwood are cut into veneer, exc&ior,
and pulpwood. The cut is gradually decreasing, which indicates that the supply of standing
b b e r is probably becoming limited. Considering the rapid growth of cottonwood, however,
it would seem that the present rate of cutting mqht be maintained almost indefinitely if the
forests are carefully handled.
The most im ortant cottonwood-producing State is Missiisippi, which cuts more than onelourth of the t o t 2 A close second is Arkmtllsas, followed by Lowiana, Minnesota, and Missouri.
These five States cut about three-fourths of the total. The cut in Minnesota is chiefly aspen
and Balm of Gilead, and no mill in that State reports a cut in excess of a million board feet of
cottonwood. In the South, 27 mills re orted for 1917 cuts of between 1 and 5 million feet, and
9 mills reported c u b in excess of 5 d o n feet.
Cottonwood, together with associated species, is logged to stream banks, usually by a n i a l s ,
and from there'it is usually towed on barges or in rafts to the mills, which are often many miles

57

4

. -,
.

58

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMXIXQE FOR BERONAUTICS.

*

distant. Lo * operations proceed throughout the year, exce t as they may be interfered
with by f l o o P T h e lumber that might be used for aircraft w come lar ely from material
&
aded as wagon-box boards and firsts and seconds. The proportion of tfese grades in the
L b e r cut varies from about 25 per cent in comparatively yo
stands to 40 or 50 per cent in
old stands of large timber. These SgUres apply to the low%sissi
pi valley cottonwood
only; the proporlaon is probably smaller in the stands farther to the nor&.
MARKETS AND USES FOR THE LUMBER.

Practically the entire cut of cottonwood lumber is further manufactured. Cottonwood
is in great demand for boxes and crates, and nearly two-thirds of the lumber cut is used by this
industry. The vehicle industry uses about 10 per cent of the cut, chiefly for wagon-box boards,
which requre high-grade material. Slightly more than 6 per cent goes into planing-mill products, 5 per cent into agricultural implements, 4 per cent into woodenware, nearly.3 per cent
into laundry appliances, about 2 per cent into furniture. Re erators, trunks,radroad cars,
musical instruments, and fixtures take considerable quantities.
ottonwood veneer in the form
of plywood is widely used for furniture, musical instruments, and sizpilar uses. A great deal
of cottonwood not reported in the lumber cut figures goes into excelsior, and a large amount
is made into pul for pa er manufacture.
Cottonwoof is usef throughout most of the Unite4 States, and considerable quantities of
plywood made from it were shipped to Europe before the war.

9

RED GUM.
(Lzipidzntbar styraeiflua.)

This species is ah0 known aa satin walnut, sweet gum, and liquidambar.
DISTRIBUTION.

Red m occurs from southern Connecticut to southeastern Missouri and south to Texas
and Florig. It reaches its best development and is most abundant in the lower Mississippi
valley, from the mouth of the Ohio River southward.
USE IN AIRCXATT.

Red gum is an excellent material for the lhanufacture of plywood, and is so used to a very
yeat extent for commercid purposes. Its use has been approved for airplane plywood. The
arge and fairly accessible supply of this species makes it a promising wood for future use in
the aircraft industry.
SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

Such incomptete estimates as are available indicate a total stand of red gum of approxh a t e 1 44 billion board feet; of this amount 30 billion feet is in the Mississippi Valley, including tritutary streams, and 14 billion feet is in the Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plain region.
The States having the largest supplies are, in the order named: Mississippi, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Texas, Alabama, Geor 'a, South Carolina, and North Carolina. These States together have
about 80 per cent of tflle total;
Although limited areas of young stands are
found, red gum usually occurs
scattered throuoh mixed .hardwood stands. It
on bottom lands more or less
subject to over6w during art of the year. Its
such species as cottonwood,
soft maple, ash, tupelo, o a b , pecan, cypress, and sycamore. The gum is frequently the predominant species. Mature trees often reach dmmeters of 4 or 5 feet or even more.
The greater part of the remainin stand of mature gum is owned by lar e land and lumber
companies. 'Since the gum land wl for the most part be suitable for agricukure when drained,
il
it seems probable that the supply of timber when once removed will never be renewed in anything like the original quantity.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.

The averaga annual cut of red gum lumber hotween 1913 and 1917 was 740 millim feet,
or ahout 100 million feet more than the average cut during the preceding six ears. In 1917
it was about 790 million feet. Production of this species will robably not falbelow the present figure for several years. The figures given do not include t e large amounts cut for veneer.
In 1910 and 1911, the last years for which reports on that product are available, nearly 150
million feet, log scale, of red gum was cut into veneer, practicall all by the rota process.
of these
,4bout 35 mills reported for 1917 cuts of red gum in excess of 5 m h o n feet each.

fl

3

SUPPLIES AND PRODUC!CION OF AIRCRAl?!l! WOODS.

59

.

. -

AXNUAIJ BEPORT XATIOpJdL ADVISORY COXMITTEE FOR BERONAUTICS.

60
.

are in the lower Mississippi region. About 200 mills in t& region and 35 in the Atlantic
coast region reported cuts of between 500 thousand and 5 . d O n board feet. Arkansas leads
in the productlon of red gum, and IS followed by &slssippl and L o w m a . These three States
cut about two-thirds of the total.
Logs are generally cut in the fall and allowed to season somewhat before being towed out
on rafts or bar es. A few operators in drier territory have railroads and use steam in loggin
usual1 on~y e larger trees are cut, since smau trees contain a large proportion of sapwoo%;
t
which rings comparatively low prices.
It is estimated that from 20 to 25 per cent of the cut in the Mississippi reeon is firsts and
seconds clear heart, while in the coast region not more than from 5 to 8 per cent IS of this grade.
Clear sap runs about 25 per cent in the valley States and 32 er cent on the coast. Material
suitable for aircraft veneer would probably correspond to t ese two grades.

%

5

-%

MARKETS AND USES FOB THE LUMBER.

a

gu”

A very large roportion of the clear heart
p+ to be exported to the countries of
western Euro e an around theMedterranean, where it IS m great favor for fumture and finish.
Practically a1 of the rest is used in industries in this country, almost none being consumed as
rough lumber.
Approximately half of the lumber and veneer used in this country is made into boxes and
crates. The quantity of red gum used by this rndust is surpassed only by that of white and
yellow pines. Fifteen per cent is used for l a + - 3
products, chiefly &ish. Thirteen per
cent goes into furniture, 3 per cent into vehic es (wagon boxes), 2+ per cent into sewing machines,
and smaller quantities into B great variety of industries.

P

P

MAHOGANY.
CENTRAL AMERICAN MAHOGANY (Swietenia nuzhagoni and S. maaophylla).
AFRICAN UHOGANY ( K h y a senegalensis).
Numerous other species of Kbya, Entandrophragma, Trichilia, and other genera are also sold 84 African mahoqany.
PHILIPPINE MAHOGANY (Shrea polysperma).

T i species ia also sold under the name of Tanguile_orBataan mahogany. Red Lauan (8.negrosensis) ia somehs

times called Philippine mahogany.

.

DISTBIBUTION.

True maho any (the American species) occurs from southern Florida to Colombia, Qenezuela, and Britis Guiana. It is most abundant in southern Mexico (Vera Crw, Tabasco, Campeche, and Chia as districts), in Central America, and in the larger islands of the West Indies.
African matogany is found in the forest belt of the west coast of Africa from the Senegal
River to the southern boundary of Angola, and across central Africa to German East Africa
and Madagascar. The largest supplies are in a belt varying in width from a few miles up to 200
miles, from the Senegal River to the Niger, and in a narrower strip from southern Nigeria to the
northern part of French Congo. The best species, K b y a senegalewis, is near1 all between the
Sene a1 and the Ni er, although it is scattered to some extent in the forests o East Africa.
%e so-called b l i p p i n e mahoganies occur in the Philippines and in neighboring parts of
Malaysia.
USE IN AIRCRAFi’.

%

t
‘

The true mahogany is amost excellent propeller wood, and has been very extensively used for
that purpose. Selected pieces of African mahogany are &j satisfactory as the true maho any, but
on account of the wide variation in atrength properties between the drfferent species an between
different lots of lumber from the same species, together with the difficulties in distinguishing
the different species by inspection, African mahogany has not been opular as a propeller wood.
The Bataan mahogany from the Philippines has also found a linrite use for propellers.
Both the American and the African mahoganies make excellent plywood, but will hardly
be used for that purpose on a large scale because of their high cost as compared with native
woods which are quite as satisfactory.

f

It

SUPPLY OF TIMBER.

$ogany occurs as a scattered tree in dense tro ical forests, which are composed of a,
?umber of species. This is equally true o the Central American and the African
.e.su@ies of standing timber are very little known except i the regions which
n
: or years.
e

P

,

61

SUPPLIES BND PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT WOODS.

The total stand of true mahogany in Central America and Mexico has been rou hly estimated at 19 billion 450 million board feet, and that in Cuba at 750 million board feet. Of
this, about one-third 1s available to present operations; the rest can be reached onl by the construction of railroads or b the introduction of different methods of logging. I exico has 15
billion feet, Honduras 1s h i o n feet Nicaragua 1) billion feet, Guatemala three-fourths of
a billion feet, Costa ria one-fourth a billion feet, and Panama and British Honduras 100 mil-

l!f

04

PRODUCTION OF LUMBEB.

,

Almost all of the Central American and African mahogany cut is exported from the producing countries. Most of it is shipped in the log or hewed into square timbers. Logs are cut by
natives, who work either for contractors or directly for the mahogany hand the production
,
varies considerably from year to year, depending upon markets, weather conditions (particularly
in Central America, where the mahogany logs are taken down to the coast by river floods), and
entirely by hand labor. A
other factors. Logging operations are usually carried on %almost
few large concerns use steam or gasoline tractors to haul their logs, but in most operations even
the largest iogs are pulled to the streams by natives.
The exports of mahogany from South and Central America and the West Indies in 1913,
which was a fair1 representative year, amounted approximately to 100 million tons or about
50 million board eet. Of this amount the United States used about half, Great Britain abouk
35 per cent (including that reexported from the United States), and France nearly all of the
remainder. The ex orts of African mahogany in the same year amounted to about 150 million
tons, or 75 million zoard feet, of which about two-thirds went to Great Britain, oneseventh
to the United States, and the rest was about equall divided between France and Germany.
s
Liverpool i the great mahogany market of the worl$ and much of the mahogan which goes
there is reexported. In 1913, the United States imported some 21 million boadfeet of mahogan from Great Britain. This was doubtless principally African mahogany from Liverpool.
T i e importation of mahogany into the United States is largely controlled by a few companies. The amount of lumber sawed in this country varies considerably from year to year,
but for the past five or six ears the reported cut hasaveraged between 20 and 25 million board
feet. This lilay be somew at less than the actual total cut. Leading States in the production
of maho any lumber are Louisiana (New Orleans), Kentucky (Louisville), Indiana (Indianapolis), &nois (Chicago),Ohio, and California. From 28 to 42 per cent of the Central American
mahogan that is imported is suitable for ropellers. The proportion of African mahogany
khat miggt be so used can not be estimate$ because the character of the timber that may be
received is uncertain.
USES FOR TEE LUMBER

s

g

Before the war, about 50 million feet of mahogany was used each year in the United States.
six per cent of this was used for furniture, 17 per cent for musical instruments, 15 per
cent or interior finish, 12 per cent for car finish, 11 per cent for fixtures, 3 per cent for caskets
and c o f b , 2 per cent for ship and boat finish, and s a l quantities for various other purposes.
ml

*hirtY-

SPANISH CEDAR.
( e r l odomta.)
Cdea
This specia ia also &led Indian mahogany.
DISTBIBUTION.

Spanish cedar occurs form Tampico, Mexico, southward to Brazil, and through the West
Indies. A closely related species, the toona or cedar mahogany (Cedrela toona), grows in the
East Indies.

.
62

ANNUAL REPORT NA'J!IONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAU!J!ICS.

USEINAIUCRAF".
'

,

SpanisE cedar, being li ht, durable, easily worked, and stron for its weight, mak& excellent
for f l p g boats and floats.
ply wood, and has been use to a considerable extent for thin pla&

9

SUPPLY OF TIMBEE

T i species occurs in about the same situations as mahogany, with which it is wsociated
hs
in the range of the latter. It is scattered through mixed stands, but is probably somewhat
more abundant than the mahogany. Cedar trees reach great size, diameters up to 6 feet being
not uncommon. Information 1s not available regarding the amount of standing cedar except
thst it h o w n to be large.
PRODUCTION OF LUMBER.
Spanish cedar is frequently cut in connection with mahogany. Cedar logs are often used
in rafts to help keep the heavler mahogany logs afloat. Considerable quantities of cedar are
logged inde endently. Data on the total production of Spanish cedar are not a t hand. From
15 to 20 m8lion feet is imported in the lo into the United States m norm+ years, while the
imports of sawed lwpber, chiefly-fro& (2-1 are estimated at about 10 million feet a year.
a,
Large quantities go also to Liverpool, London, and Hamburg. Since only selected material is
usually imported, a very large proportion of it would be suitable for use in aircraft. Our
largest imports are from Cuba. Other countries which supply considerable uanties are Brazil,
Mexico, British Honduras, Colombia, NicaIagua, Costa Rica, Panama,and utch Guiana.

96

%

USES FOB THE LUMBEB.

Almost the entire output of Spanish cedar is normally made into cigar boxes. I n the
United States more than 99 per cent o the cedar wed goes to that industry.
f

0

'

