TECHNICAT4 NOTES.
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTIOS.

No. 63

THE

EMPLO~AENT

OF AIRSHIPS FOR THE TRANSPORT OF PASSENGERS.

Indications on the Maximurr. Limits of Their Useful
Load, Distance Covered, Altitude and Speed.
By

Umberto Nobile,
Director of Italian Aeronautic.al Construction.

August, 1921 .

· I"

Reproduced from
best available copy.

NATIONflL ADVISORY COMl,:ITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
TECHNIC~L

NOTE NO . 63

THE EMPLOYI.1ENT OF AIRSHIPS FOR THE TfU,NSPORT OF. PASSENGERS.
INDIC_\TIONS ON THE

MAXIMU~.~

LOAD. DI ST AN CE .COVERED

I

LIMITS OF THEIR USEFUL
ALT I'!'UDE ..\ND SPEED,

*

By
Umberto Nobile~
Di re ctor of It alian Aeronauti cal Const ruct ion.
1.
As an indispensable premise to this study it should be
st at ed frankly that it is rather risky to judge of the app roximate 11eight of an airship of large cubic capacity, ** saY7300,000
cubic meters;> by taking as a basis the anticipated i7eight of a
similar airship of small cubic capacity, say, 30,000 cuoic meters.

Even were it possible, by applying the principles of mechanical similitude, to establish exact laws of variation for the
~ei~hts of the various constituent parts of the airsh ip, the previsions vlOuld still be far from the reality, especially for very
lart?;e ai rships. It may, in fact, happen that Hi th increase of
dimensions v,e find ourselves, at a certain point under the necess ity of radically modifying tnis or t \at p c....rt of t~le airsl1 ip, Or
we :shall have to adopt materials tlaving cha,racteristics different from t :lose used in the model, or in.surmountable and unforeseen difficulties in workr.1arlship and asse;ilbling may constrain us
to abandon that type of airship or co~pletely c~ange the cubic
c 8:1) ac it y •
It is, hovfever, undeniably useful to try to establish, even
by a very rough approximat:on, the laws governing the weight of
similar airships which may' gi~e a sufficiently clear idea of the
greater or lesser advantages to be obtained by a given cubic
c apacity . But when , having established tllese laws, Vie find, as
in fact, ',"[e .10 find , that the unit weight first decreases to a
minimum value in relation to the cubic capacity X ~~d then incr3ases until, in the cubic capacity Y (limit cubiC capacity)

* From
** For

the IlGiornale dei Genio Civile," Anno LIX, 1921.
the sake of aimplicity and clearness we shall use no unusual Or out of the way terms l but only such as are in current
use, as cubic capacity, empennaGe, ballonet , etc.

- 2 the weight a~t)soI'bs the '\II[hole of the lifting force, we must 00:'1sider the valuAs. of X and Y as being aca:eptable only as ind.icatJ.ons of THEIR ORDER OF MAGNITUDE, since it mC),y 1Vcll h'appen
.l
that, fo r inst ance, for one of the reasons ab:rwe Lh·l i:;ated., the
litni t Y may be reachedl more rap idly, or even e~ceeded.
2.
In ayplying, whenever possible, the laws of similiLude
to airship structures, we will keep in mind:
a) That the principal st at ic effort s produced., e:i ther
by weight or by the press1.:.re of the gas, may, with suffiaient appro=timation, be consideredi. as proportional to the cubic cap:).ai·i:y
V.
Conseq}lently, the stresses in thelJ'arious parts are pr opo:r7
tional to V, and therefore the weight is proportional to V~ 3 ,
b) That the mtin dynamical efforts due to air pressur~,
are proportional to V2 3 and consequently the weight of the
various struGrtures varies proportionally to V.

3. ~e will limit our investigations to the semi-rigid Italian T type, but it is obvious that, by gerierali:i1ation, the law
of variaticn that we shall eS'~ablish is applicable- to any other
type of airs.;l~_p and, in particular, to the rig:LGt Ze ppelin type,
wi·c'b. some slight modifications in the numerical coei'i"ict::ients. introduGedi in the general formula e~ressing the weight of the airship in f~mction of the volume and maxi~um velocity.
By the maximum velocity of the airship we mean that veloaity
which it ce~n safely develop at a low al+,itude: 1 saY1 at 300 m.
abo\re sea level. This velocity, expressed, in km/h., we indicate.
.
by w.
the

In speaking of the weight of the airship we will consider
parts:

follo~ing

The external envelope and accesaory organs;
The stiffening part of the bow of the envelope;
The stabili7ling and control planes (keel 8;."'1.d rudders.);
~he frame stru~~ure and acaessories;
The maneuvering devices (lane.ing, mooring, etc.);
Electric light plant, wireless pl~~, fans, et~.;
The pilot's cabin;
The passenger cabin;
Reservoirs for ben~ine, oil, and water.
Besides this, in order to complete the evaluation of the
weights mien, unlike those of the fuel and the useful load, remain constant, ~~d cannot be dispensed with1 we ~ill also conside~ the following weights:

- 3 -

The crew;
Engine spare parts and various necessary tools;
The reserve ballast and the , ballast corresponding to the
first 300 meters.
The reserve stoc.k of benz..ine and oil.
4 . - THE ENVELOPE - ThE;

e n~re lope

comprises:

The external envelope of the ga s bag;
The separating diaphragm between the gas and the air, C O ffimonly calledl the internal ballonet;
The ballonet on the beam;
The transversal diaphragms;
The conneotion between the frame with the'keels and rudders;
The ga~ and air valves with their corresponding aontrols.
In the rubbs r-covered and varnished envelope employed' in
the various parts of airships~ we must always distinguish the
weight of the canvas part from the weightt of the rubber and varnish applied to it. The function of the rubber is essentially
to render the bag gas-proof and, consequently, in theory, by
fi~ng the tolerance limit of the daily penetration of air in a
cubic meter of hydrogen, the weight of rubber fo~ every s~arffi
meter of the gas bag surface may decrease with the increase of
cubic capacity. In practice, however, for various considerations we may assume the unit weight to be about constant, and
therefore the /total weight of the rubber may be taken as proportional to V2 3. The s~ae proportion holds for the weight' of
t~e varnish.
EXTERNAL ENVELOPE. - The weight of the external Part of the gas
bag minus the weight of the rubber ?btained as specified above,
may be taken as. proport ional to
In fact, while from one
side the surface increasea as V2 3, on the other hand, the
tension (and conse~ently, for the same specific resistanc~, the
thickne~s also) increases in proportion to the pressur
and t~
the radius of curva.ture, that is, in proportion to VI73 X V 1 3.

y4:3.

DIAPHRAGM SEPARATING THE GAS FROM THE AIR. - This gas tight diaphragm, interposed between the hydrogen and the air, must never
aome under tension. It must serve only as a means of holding
the rubber an~ therefore its total weight may be taken aa proport ional to V~ 50.
TRANSVERSAL DIAPHRAGMS. - These must be capable of withstanding
a given difference of pressure between two adjacent gas GOmpartments. It is, however, rational to consider suoh dtifference as
being proportional to the/mean pressure of the gas and, therefore, proportional to V1 3. Conse~ently, we may assume that/
the total weight of the diaphragms varies in proportion to V* 3

- 4 -

Implicitly we have also assumed that the number of diaphragnJs
is always the same.
GDNNECTING LINKS. - The tensions in the links connecting the external gas envelope and the longitudinal beam (catenaries) are
proportional to V'I The weight of such elements is therefore
proportional to V4 3 . ,
Regarding the elements. or links connecting the env-elope' Ilit:t
the keels and rudders, it should be remarked that, as we shall
see la,er on, the total forces acting on them are proportional
to V2 3 . Also, the stresses; to which are subjected these connecting links (except the stresses producedl by inertia) fall un-der the same relation of proportionality~ and therefore the
weight' of these connecting links will vary in proportion to 1/V,
aonsidering that their length increases in proportion to V 3 •
GAS' VALVES. - F'o r simplid.tyts sake we will assume that the dimensions of these valves remain always the same
In this c,se, increasing the pressure of the gas in the proportion of V1 3 J the holding power of eaen -valve' increases in
the ratio of V1 6. It follows, that the number of waJ.ves, and
conse~en~ly, their total weight, varies in proportion to

~

_ ..:.0/6

... l I 6

-

V

V

•

In order to avoid introducing this l'levt exponent, considering
also the relative smallness of this weight, we will !assume that
the weight of the gas valves is proportional to V~/3. On the
other hand, this difference in the law' of variation may be realized. by suitably' increasi ng the dimensions, of the lifting part
of the valve only, up to the limit allowe~ hy the strength of
the othe,r parts.
CONTROL CABLES. - According to the hypotheses gi~n above~ the
Weight of the ~?les controlling the valves is numerically pro7
portional to y2 3, while their length is proportional to yl 3.
We may therefor~ t~~e their total weight as proportional to V.
It should be remarked. here that, in practice, c:onstru~ors
will probably avoid. having an excessive number of valves and
valve controls which would entail a more rapid variation of
weight, unless the stru~ure of the valv:~ could be altered:l for
the purpose of making it less heavy.
AIR VALVES . - In this case, cronsidering the less feN orable cronditiona of functioning, we must assume the pressure to be ~onstant.
TIe may therefore assume the number of waIves, and consequently
their total weight to be proportional to V.

--------=-------------------------------------------------------- -- -- -

-

5 -

ConseqQently, the weighn o~ the control cables increases in
propontion to V x V 1 / 3 = V413 •
TOTAL WEIGHT OF ENVELOPE. - We h2se now analyzedJ. the weights of

the various part 80f tile en velope of our model airship., and
obt:.J.1.n "th6 fC: . 2.ovring e.xq:>ression for computing the total
weight of the en~elope:
ther ::3~lY

3.410 V:a/3 + 0.008 V + 0.00374. V4 / 3 •
5. -

STIFFENING

OF THE BOW.

The uniit pressure exerted;. by the air on the surface of the
stiffened·" part of the bow is propor-Cij.on:0. to t~e sO':;lare of the
velo~~ ty. / Since.., however, th3 linear ciimcnsiOllr3 are proportional to Vl 3, the bunCing ?foments, and corli-s9qllently also the resulting stresses, are proportional to V 1 ! 3 V 2. On the other
han~ the total surface v~ries in proportion to v<1 3.
It therefore follOWS that the totBJ. 'weight is proportional to V v 2 •
In o:-cder to be exc.ct, we 8r.. ou1;1. also c"o~s:;'cle:r the secondary
stresses due to the w6igjlt; i'1;se1£, st resses w"'1ich;> of cou:!:se,
increa.se more rapic.lly than the preceding ones. 'l'hese, however,
are negligible especially in the upper part which rests on the
envelope:.
In the case of our model, the total weight of the
bow (including its cov.ering) is giwen by:
10- 6

where I as
km/h.

always~

•

stiffene~

1. 3 V v 2

V is expressed in cubio meters> and

v

in

6. - STABILIZING AND CONTROL PLANES.
It is extremely Gtif:fficult to establish a law' governing the
vaxiation of the weight of the stabilizing and controlling organ~, and would first of all re~uire a close e~inatiom of 'the
various pointa connects&with these functions, an e~ination
which we cannot enter into here.
We will therefore make only a rough approximation by the aid
of simpliffYing hypotheses . For ihstance l we sha~l r-ot distinguish between the fixe~and mobile planes, assuming that, according to the re~irements of steering, a greater or smaller part of
the total surface area may be rendered!.. mobile without greatly
affecting the mean uni~ weigh~ .

VERTICAL PLANES. - Considering only the stabilizing i\L~ction, it
is evident. that the total area of these planes, must be proport ional to the 8.1 rface area of the env;elope, if the right ing moment

L

.., 6 -

due to the action of the air on the for m is to be proportional
er
to the upsetting moment cause~ b¥ the action of the air on the
latter.
On the other hand, the unit pressure may be assumed to be
con ,.,st ant , and it then follows that the total weight of these
planes varies in proportiom to V.

If we now consider the variation of speed, it is evident
that, for inoreasect. speedl these planes should be suitably strength·ened, though it is difficult to establish a priori in what measure this should be done. But an the other hand., with increased
velocity the deviations due to the disturbing cause diminish,
and therefore if we wish to keep the stability co~stant we may reduce as required the area of the planes. So that, for the sake
of simplicity and as a rough approximat ion we may say that the
total weight of these planes is independent of v.
HORI2:0NTAL PLANES", - For these planes, we m:ightt employ the same

general ~onsiderations as for the vertiQal planes J were it not
that the Case is rendered more Q~mplex· by/the stati~ righting moments vh ich increasEr in proportion to v~ 3. However', considering only the stabilizing function, the total ~,ea of the planes
in question may increase less rapidly than Vf' 3, and therefore
the total weight. may vary less rapidly than V.

When., instead, we cOllDSider the regime of mo~'ement along inclinedLtrajeotories, we easily come to the conclUsion that if we
wisl)., for instance, to maintaiIlll. the ma;&timum climbing speedl. unchangedl (that is ecpal to horizontal velocity, the marimum. tangent of the angle of climb), it is necessary to increase the angle of attack, thus bringing about an increase in the unit pressure and therefore in the unit weight.
It is also useful to consider that by increasing V the mobile part of the horizontal planes must increase more rapidly
than the fixed part. This may lead to notable modifications in
the design which, in turn, will produce new uncertainties in the
evaluation of the weight itself.
From the various considerations so far mad~, we may conclude
that, a.s a rough approximation, the weight of the horizontal planes
varies in prqportion to V.
For our model we find that the total weight of the empennages
may be ex.pressedi by 0.043 v.
CON~ROLS. - The forces actin~ on the rudder control cables
may be taken as proport iona]. to V2 3 and likeV{.ise: their seQ;tiona. ~heir weight is therefore proportional to V.

RUDDER

- 7 -

In our case, comprlslng also the } control devices in the pilot's c:abinJ we have, for the total weight, O.004V. ·
7.

LONGITUDINAL

BEAM.

The oomplexity of the fo~ces acting on the framewonk (longi- ·
tudinal be am) make sit e xdi rerne ly clli. ff i cuI t toe st abl ish a f 0 rmu1 a
giwing the variation in weight with suffioient approximation.
We will again refer to the exceptions made at the beginning of
this paper and here alrr0> for the considerable item of the weight
of the airship, we must be satisfied. with a rough appronmation.
The longitudinal beam is simultaneously acted upon:
a) By the static forces due to the loads it has to sustain, namely, the keels, rudders, power plant, fuel, and useful
load.
The total weight of all these loads is represented by the
difference between the total lifting force f V and the sum o~
the weights of the envelope, the larger part of the keels, and
part of the stiffened framewotk. This weight can, therefore,
only be expressed by a rather comple~ function of the volume.
However, on analyzing the above mentioned e~ression, we
find that this total weight may be taken, with an approxdmation
of 5%, aspr~ortional to V.
On the other hand" for obviOUs reasons it would be diffficult to vary the volume without altering the distribution of load
in the model. Since it is evidently impossible to provid~ be:f.:mrehandl for such variations and even more imposs,ible to account
~or them, we must inevitably accept the simplifying hypothesis
that the distribution of loa~ remains the same.

Admitting this hypothesis, we are justified. in saying that
the forces due to s:tati~ loads are proportional to V and consequently, that t1(e weight of the longitudinal beam increases in
proportion to V2 3.
b) By the dynamic forces brought about by the action
of the empenrnages. These forces, according to the co~~~dera­
tions made above, must be taken: as proportional to V
and
therefore the increase of weight in the armature due to them is
proportional to V.
c) The dynamic forces due to the thrust of the propellers, or, whiCh is the same thing, the reaction exercised by the
air on the various parts of the airship vrh en its axds is parallel to the line of flight. This reaction is proportional to

r----- -- - - - - -- -- - - - --

- - --

- - --

-

-

- --

-

-

-

-- -

- 8 -

z/ a
V

2

and conse~ently the reeulting efforts in the armature
vary accoraing to the same law of variation.
V

We must howeve~ distinguish between v constant and v
variable when evaluating the increase in weight dUe to these
f ·orces.
In the first case, aombining the dynamia forces in question
wi th the maximum lea£t favorable forces enumerated: in (a) and
(b) (calculating these by m
eans of various hypotheses on the
distnibution and value of the useful loa~ and of the load of fue l
oil> and bal~ast) the result is that the increase in wei ght in
the armature dUe to such forces, remains alwaya proportionaJ. to

v.

.
Things are much more complicated when the "otelo(tity is taken
as baing variable~ because in that case) for a sufficiently high
value of that ve:lom'ity it may happen that, at a given m.oment,
the reacting force of the thrust of the propellers in a given
element of the amature "1i11 prevail ove r the forces a + b,
thus giwing rise to an increase in the weight ~ of that element,
which does not happen.· · in the model due to the fact that the sign
of the ma»imum resulting effort is reversed. It is easily understood that, under these c:onditions, it is not possible to f 'ind
the means of account ing for such an eventuality.
However, considering that the dynamic forces of this category are small when compared with those of the two precedling
categories, and comsidering also that the velocity limit s- attainable are relatively low# we shall be able to say, with a degree of appro~mation suf~icient for the nature of our study,
that the increase in weight due to the thrust of the propeller
is proportional to V v2 •
In the Case of our mOdel, summarily analyZting the effects
due to the threa kinds of forces mentioned above, we will consider that a suff:loiently clear statement of the total weight of
the longitudinal beam is given by the following f onmula:
(10- 6 .0.5 v o2 + 0.022) V + 0.00236

V4/~

,

8.

ACCESSORIES OF THE LONGITUDINAL BEAM.

We shall consider as accessories the covering of the beam,
the internal gangway, and the pneumatic; shook absorbers .
The prevailing forces are those due to the action of the
air. In conse~ence of these forces the weight of the covering
of the beam varies in proport ion to V v 2 and" fo r our model
we have: 10- 6 • 1 . 3 V v2.

J

- 9 -

THE GANGWAY. - We Should remember that live loads, though remaining invariable in absoluye v'a lue , increase numerlc'aJ.ly at least
in the proport:ion of Vl 3 . Therefore, assuming that the width
of the gangway reoains the same and that the number of supports
reff.aina al~ the same, the bendfing moments increase proportionally to V2 3 and likewise the weight itself.
It is probable, however, that the constru~tor gains in weight
by inareaaing, if possible, the number of suspens~ons . of the envelopa; but, on the other hand·, it is probable that this will involve increasing the wiQth of the gangway. In conclusion,
~herefore, it seems that we are justified in assuming the weight
to vary in the proportion of V Z [3 as stated abo"We.

vz/s .

For our model we have: 0.374 •

SHOCK ABSORBERS. - The forces to which the shock absorbers are

subjected.. are about proportional to the cubic: capaa::ity of the
airship . We may thereforeJ assume that their number or length
must be increaseGL. ~v-i th increased, cubic capac;ri ty, leaving the
width unchanged. In that case the total weig'h t will incres,se in
proportion to VI. Yor our model the value is 0.003- V.
9.

ENGINE SETS AND ShlPPORTS.

After determining the m~ffium welocity which the airship
must be capable of attaining~ the power required may be taken as
proport ional to 1J2/3 v 3 and in inverse proporti on to ·. the propeller efficienqr :
N

sume:

= ~ ria

va

For our type of airship, e~ressing
k = 10

and therefora for

t) ;:

-6

v

in km/h, we may as-

x 1.05

0.7.

We may aruuit that the weight per horsepower , Which we will
call TT remains const ant, and we may al so admit t hat the we ight
of all the accessories (radiators for water and oil, taken as.
full; piping aystem; st art ing devices; c.ontrols; instruments; propellers) is proportional to the power and averages 0 . 65 kg. per

*

For the Various types of
have found coefficients.
future c:onstruc.tions we
1.4. For Zeppelins the

airships constructed by us so far, we
varying from 1. 45 to 2 . 10. In our
shall presumably reach somewhere below
coefficient is smaller .

- 10 -

n.p..

For eng,irIes weighing 1.20 per h.p. we may therefore consider
the total weight of the engine set to be about 1.85 kg. per h.p.

As regards the supports, the forces to whiCh these are subjected are partly static, proportional to the weight of the engine set and therefore to V"2 3v3, and partly <tnamiC: proportional to the thrust of the propellers. If we assume, therefore,
that their number 'Jremains unchanged, their weight must increase
in proportion to V.
Such an hypothesis is, however, hardly probable, since it is
certain that, in order to obtain a better distribution of load,
the number of supports must be increase~. Such being the case,
we will simply assume that their total weight is also proportional to the power developed by the engine set which, in our
Case., ' is giv;en by 0.25 kg. per h.p.
Summarizdng the total weight of the engine set we have:
( TT

and for

+ O. 65 + O. 25) N
TT

=

(11

+ O. 90) 10 - 6

•

1. 5 •

~ / 3 VI3

= 1.20:

10.

MANEUVERING DEVICES.

The total weight of these devices l and 2f~ecially of the
cables, evidently varies in proportion to V •
In point of fact, while the forces are profortional to
the length of the cables is proportional to Vl 3.

V,

In our case we have:
4

0.00060 • V
11.

/

3

LIGHTING PLAN'Ir, WIRELESS PLANT I ETC.

The e~ipment of the airship is completed by the lighting
plant, wireless installation, ventilators, safety appliances,
signals, and other minor accessories.
Of these weights some, such as that of the wireless installation, may be assumed to increase slightly with the cubature of
the airship (in fact1 it is probable that a wider range of wireless will be re~ired for larger airships). Other access9ries,
such as the lighting plant, increase in proportion to V:a :3;
others, as the ventilators and safety appliances, increase in the
same rat iO as the cubature.

- 11 -

In the case of our model we have :
4.5V

12.

l/3

+0. 19if

/3

+0.0 07 V

PILOT'S CAB IN .

ifl1struments: reThe Pilo t's cabin is prov ided with all the eq.uipment.
quired.. for navi gatio n and w~th othe r neces sa.ry
of
It is diffi cult to give a defi nite ratio of the varia tion
the weig ht with the cuba ture.
cabarea of
To 's impl ify matt ers l 'fe will assume that the load alro the
inin is prop ortio nal to v 3 I and that the tota l
t~~aJ.
creas es in prop ortio n to V- 3 . Wr then conc lude that the \I .
0.300
weig ht varie s in prop ortio n to ~ 3. In our case:
13.

PASSENGER CABINS.

weig ht of the
It is not poss ible to deter mine a prio ri the must evid ently
passe nger cabin s and thei r e~uiprnent, since this edt We can,
carri
be prop ortio nal to the number of passe nger s loaili by addan g 20 to
weig ht in the usef ul
howe ver, inClu de this
a5 kg. per pass enge r.
14.

BEN~INE,

OIL, AND. WATER TANKS.

nts
The weig ht of these tank s, comp risin g thei r supp orts, amou
in.
to abou t 6% of the weig ht of the liqp id conta ined there
ted
The weig ht of the wate r tank s can be counweigin with the
ht of the benast, and we will recko n the
weig ht of the ball
ine and
zine and oil tank a by addin g 6% to the weig ht of the benz
oil needect. per kilom eter.
the airsh ip itWe have now evalu ated the entir e weig ht of g shap e, we must
self. In orde r to cons ider the airsh ip in flyin ball ast, baladd.. the weig ht of the orew, spare parts , reser ve and oil.
last need ed for take off, and the weig ht of fuel
15.

THE CREW.

on the
The number of men form ing the crew depe nda ~ot only whic h
es
stanc
cuba ture of the airsh ip, but also on othe r 'c ircumwill there fore
nt for a prio ri, and we
are mot poss ible to accou
be satis fied with a rough appro xdma tlon.

- 12 -

The minimum orew needed oonsists of:
1
1
1
1

Commander
Pilot
Mechanic
Wireless operator.

With increased cubature of the airship~ we may, generally
speaking, assume that the journeys undertaken will be longer and
more fatiguing, and that~ therefore, double shifts will have to
be provided for .
We are therefore justified in assuming th,t the weight of a
minimum personnel will be in proportion to Vi 3.
The total number of meohanics, less the one include~ in the
minimum crew, may be r,¥ghly considered as proportional to the
power, that is, to V2 ~V3.
TheTe are also the all-around men who, though not re~ired
on a small airship are certainly indispensable on a large one.
The weight of these may be taken as proportional to the cubature
of the airship_
In the Case of our model, including also the weight
clothes and food reserves, we have:
20

16.

v l/3 +

10-

6

•

of

0.20 • V 2/3 v 3 + 0.003 • V

SPARE PARTS IDR THE ENGINE SET AND TOOLS.

This weight may be taken as proportional to the
In our case it is given by:
10 -IS
17.

.,

0.16 • V Z /

3

V

engin~

power.

3

RESERVE BALLAST AND TAXE OFF' BALLAST.

As we said at the beginning, we shall suppose that navigation is no:rmally started at an altitude of about 300 m. above sea
level . The corresponding lightening of the airship will be approximately given by 0.030 V.
The reserve ballast may alsO be taken as proportional to the
cubature and we may say that its weight in kg . is numerically expres.sed by 4% of the vo~ume expressed in cubic meters.
The total weight of the ballast is thus
0.030 V + O.O4() V

e~ressed

= 0.070

V.

by:

- 13 -

18.

RESERVE STOCK OF FUEL AND OIL.

It is logical# we believe, that, in order to ensure safe
navigation, the reserve stock of fuel and oil carried must be
large enough to meet all eventualities. This reserve nrust be in
proportion to the amount re~ired for normal navigation. We
will calculate this by increasing by 30%the usual consumption
per kilometer, or, which amounts to the same thing, the speclfic
consumption per h.p.
19.

GENERAL FORMULA FOR THE USEFUL LIFTING FORCE.

Establishing, as we did. at the beginning, the approximate
laws. governing the variation in the weights of the airship, the
armament~ and the crew, we find that the total weight,
P, of
the airship reacr.y for navigat ion (except:, the passenger c'abins~
the ben2Zine and oil tanks, and the reserve st oak of benz-ine and
oil) is e~ressed in function of the cubature and of the velocity
by s iXl: terms re spe at i ve ly prop ort i onal t 0

V/ 3

,

V~/3,

V3

V-Z/ 3

I

V,

V4/~

V2 V,

In Table I ·(see at the end of this pap.e r) the numerical coeffic:ient s of these terms are summarized., and from that table we
derive the: follov1ing e:x:pression for P:
(2)

p::: 24. 5 VI/a

in which
in kg.

V

+ (3.274 + 10-,6 3.51 v 3

is expressed in cubic meters,

V is the
flation.

m~imum

VZ /

)

v

3

+

in km/h

and

P

effective volume of the gas bag after in-

If we subtract the 'V7eight P from the total lifting fo rce
at the sea level, f V*, we shall obtain the lifting forCff of
which we can dispose for the useful load, and for the provision of
benzine and oil neede~ fox navigation. We will call this the
USEFUL lifting force and will represent it by <P.
We should recall once more:
1st .

*

That the useful load comprises rrot only the weight

In our calculations for f we shall assume the mean value of
1100 kg. per cubic. meter of gas..

- 14 of the passengers~ their baggage and food supplies~ but also the
\veight of the cabins suitablyr fitted up for the number of pas sen -·
gers that can be car~ied.
2nd. That in the provision of benZl.ine and oil is included.. not only that required' for normal navigation, but also a
proper q.uantrity of reserve stOCK together with the tanks required for holding the entire provision.
Putting formula (2) in the general form:
(:3 ' )

P

we obtain for

= Cl

V 1 I '3 +

f3 va I 3 +

ry V

+

6 V4I3

~

(3 )
This formula shows that there are two values of V for
which .~ = 0 lone very small, the other very large. Passing
~r6m the first to the second value, the useful lifting force
first increases, then, after reaching a ma.x.imum walue, decreases
unt il it again equals Zlero.
The v·alue of

V

which corresponds to ~ maJrl mum , is obtainV from formula (3) and making it

ed~ by emraClting the value of

equal to

(4)

~ero:

f V

ao.

VARIATIONS OF THE COEFFICIENT OF UTILIZATION IN FUNCTION OF THE CUBATURE AND VELOCITY.
LIMIT REGIMES OF FLIGHT.

We will call "Coefficient of Utilization" the ratio P between the useful lifting force and the total lifting force:
(5)

P

= f ~V:::

1 - 1 (V- a/3 +
f
a.

t:l.
t-'

v- 1/3 +

f\I

+

,.

1/3

,oV)

Here also, starting from a minimum v:alue of V for which
P increases rapidly vwith the increase of
cubature until it reaches a maximum. After reaching this m~­
mum, the value of P decreases slowly d.own to zero again for a
rather large value of V.
p = 0, the value of

The values of V for which P = 0 (lower and upper limits
of cubature) are obtained from the following equation:

- l5 (6)'

"IV +

and, of course, the lower limit is higher as the velocity is lowIn fact, in this case the coefficients j3 and 'Yare small
al so, and we have!

ex.

• r

'Y
V

+ "I "

::; 'Y

Va

In the Case of our model we find for these l&Ner limits of
the following values*
at 90 km/h

V :::

N

1000
2300

at , laO

II

V :::

IV

at 150

"

V :::

..... 13000

Th e ma.'ld.mum VJalue of
5 V4 /

3

P is

= 2

foun~

ex. V1 /

3

by the following equation:

+ f3 V 2 /

3

from which, negleoting the first term of the second member. we
obtain as a rough a,pprommation:
@' + @IIV~:
6

We may therefore conclude that W
ITH INCREASE OF VELOCITY
MAmMUM. DIMINISHES AND TENDS TOWARDS LARGER CUB ATU RE'.
As a matter of fact, in our case "'ie find the following values (sea Tables !I~ III, IV and diagrams):
at

90 km/h

max.;:.::: 0.450 f or V ::: 35,000 m. 3

120

II

It

"150

II

If

II

= O. 345
V == 60, 000
= o.aoa " v =125,000
II

m. 3

m. 3

We would remark here that~ contrary to the current opinion,
the maximum walues of the coefficient of utilization are to be
found for relatively small cubatures.
The upper limit regime of flight to which the airship can
steadily lift itself (assuming that there is no change in equilibrium. between the inte.m al and external temperature) is that
for wh ich the co.r responding value of the air density is in the
*Regarding th~ ~OSSibility of practical ly realiz ing these r[.inim~
values of cubature:., · the reservations and observations rlia:te at t :ne
beginning of this st udy apply here also.

- 16 -

same ratio to the ciensity of the air at sea level as P
This limit thus depends essentia11y on the value of p.

to

f V.

Considering the mean oonditions of temperature and atmospherio pressure, and assuming a constant ~ifference of temperature of 0.005a centigrades per meter, we find the following values which hav.e been computed. taking into account also the first
300 meters elevation.
for P ::: 0.20

H

max. =

above sea level.

Z'430 m.

"

0.25:

11

3050

II

II

"

"

0 .. 30

II

3~,700

"

"

It

n

0.35

II

4380

n

II

11

Ir

0 .. 40

5120

"

II

II

Tl

0.45

5870

II

11

11

11

0.55

6700

II

"

and in the case of our model l corresponding to the values of
giwen above, we find:

m~.

at

90 km/h

II

II

n

21.

120
150

II

v -=
V=

35,000

p

H max. ::: 5870 m.

60,000

II

::: 4260 m.

V ::: 125,000

n

= 2450

OPTIMUM CUBATURE.

m.

nONSUMPTION PER KILOMETER ..

For the balloon the optimum oubature is evidently given by
the ma,1£:imum v,alue of the coefficient of utilization .
As a matter of fact, for p max,. the useful load is raised
to a given height. which is ma:xdmum, and the altituda to which a
given useful load. C.all be raiseGlt is also maxrimuDl.
But in the case of an airship it is evident that we must
take into account the m~mum. distance over which a given useful
load can be carried.
If we oall p
the lifting force per oubic meter required
for the useful loa'd.l and c the supply of ben~ine and oil re~ired per kilometer, we shall be able to measure the UNIT VELOCITY of the airship by:
f:

::

f p

- Pu

c

-------------

----- -

-

--

- 17 -

whioh represents the maximum distance
Pu can be carried.

over which the load

L

As we must first establish a value of p, we will take that
which gives the ma.xd.mur.l value of L x pu. This oaximum is evidently obtained when the useful lifting force, P f, is e~ua1ly
distributed.. between the useful load and the supply of fuel and
oil. We will therefore assume as the ratio of the unit efficien cy of the airtihip, the value:

( = 0.55

( 7)

P
o

-

We will now determine the value of
that THE NORMAL VELOCITY OF NAVIGATION,

Q
in the hypothesis
v o ' IS 0BTAINED BY
UTILIZING HALF OF THE AVAILABLE POWER, tha1i is:

N

o

1 k V2 /

==

2

TJ

3

V

3

We shall then have:
v o == 0.794 v

and the refore:
No

-=

We will assume that the engine plant consumes about 2:50 grs.
of ben~ine and oil per hp/h. In order to calCUlate the total
supply of benz'ine and oil needed" we will add' 30%to the normal
consumption, and in order to calculate the total weight we must
also take into aco.ount the weights of the containers. which we
have avaluated. at 6% of the total weight of fuel and oil. W~
shall then: '. have per h.p./h. a weight of
(0.250 + 0.075) x 1.06 == 0 . 345 kg.

and therefore the total weight per kilometer will be given by:
No
c == 0.345 -

Vo

and assuming for k the value 1011
(8):

6

c = 10-

1.5 we obtain:
9

x 326:,

and subst i tuting in the eiipre seion of E::
(9)

X

V

2

3
/

2
V

... 19 -

The OPTIMUM CUBATURE is that for which E: as sumes its r:axi mum
value. It is obtained by 8ol~~ng the following equation!
a. V1 /

2' ( f - 'Y ) V ::: 4

( 10 )

3

13 V2 /

+ 3'

3

+

4

[) V

3
/

We should not be surprised that we find some very low value s.
In fact it is evident that the optimum. cubature must always be
less than the one corresponding to the m~iroum value of p~ because for larger cub )3.tures the denominator of (: increases,
while the numerator decreases.
In our case we find:
optimum. cubatura :::

90 km/h.

for

~

5,000

120

n

11

II

= ""10 , 000

150

"
"

II

11

11

::: ':"'30,000

If we now consider the velocity only as variable, it is obvious that efficiency diminishes w-ith t he increase of velocity)
that is, there does not exist an OPTIMUM VALUE OF VELOCITY outside of ze;ro for which effic-leney becomes maxnmum. And in fact,
if in V2~V3 we express the coefficients ~ and ry in function
of the velocity:

13 :: \3' + 13" r
:::

,

n

ry + ry v

::
2

3.274 + 10- 6 3.51 v

= O. 160

+ 10

-6

3. 10 v

3

2

alld then make:

we find:
-

a.

V

2

which, for greater
v3

:: _

clearnes~,

f V -

-1/3

13"

we may write:

( a

from which we see that the existence of ~~ optimum value of ' the
velocity different from zero is contingent on the condition:

~9

-

-

which can never be attained because we shouid also have:
f V
22 .

P

<

CUBATURE OF MI NIMUM CONSmlPTION.

DISTANCE LIMITS.

When we come to consider the efficiency of the airship SOlely
from a mechanical point of view 1 we find that for each velocity
there is a certain cubature which permits of carrying the unit of
useful weight to the unit of distance with a minimum expenditure
of energYI that iS I with a minimum aonsun1ption of fuel.
Let Pu be the
ry to a distanc~ L.
will be given by:

useful load which an airship can carThe consumption of fuel per kilogrammeter

~~mum

c L PuL -

c
Pu

We will assume, as before l that the useful lifting force is
equally distributed between the useful load and the supply of fuel
and oil in such a way as to give Put its maxdmum value.
In such a case ' the consumption per kgm . will be proportional
to:
o
,-

that iS I in inverse proportion to the maxd.mum distance which the
airship can cover without any useful load. We will call this
dist anc~ the IILIMIT nIST ANCE".
It is evident that there e~ists a value of V for which the
unit consumption is minimum and therefore the distance limit is
m~mum.
In fact, we have only to consider that if the cubature
increases indefinitely, the useful lifting force will finally
reach zero , while c always has a positi~.;e value.
We will determine the value of this CUBATURE OF MINIMUM CONSUMPTION, which we may also call the CUBATURE OF MAXIMUM RANGE.
Keeping in mind
T.

-

-max.-

~

c

fo~las

f V -

(3) and (8) we can put :

( Cl. V

l/3

+

lO~9

I? v

Z/3

+

• 326 • ' V2

t

V +

0 V

4/3 )

3 V 2.

Soliting this equation for the volume and taking it as equal
to zero we find:

- 30 'Y V - 2

f V +

an eq..uation which, solved for
of minimum conwmption.

gives the value of the cubature

Vi,

may be oonsi.d -

This value being very high, the terms
ered as negligible, and then we have only:
(13)

a result which may be enunci ated.. thus: THE LINEAR DIMENSIONS OF
THE AIRSHIP OF MINIMUM CONSUMPTION VARY LINEARLY WITH THE COEFFICIENT 'Y AND THEREFORE WITH THE SQUARE OF THE VELOCITY AND INCREASE AS THE VELOCITY DIMINISHES.
model~

In point of fact, having, for our
for

f

90 km/h

-

'Y

::::

0.915
0.896

"
2 6

II

"

::

II

and

120
150

n

IT

== 0.870

== 0.0134) we find:

for

90 km/h

cubature of min. oons.= ··"'"

318000m~

II

120

/I

II

"

n

11

:::

"" 299000m3

t1

150

IT

n

II

"

"

:=

3
'" 274000m

23.

LIMIT VELOCITY.

For each cubature, the airship is designed. for reaching a
certain maximum velocity which cannot be exceedero. This limit
value is at once obtained by s:> lwing for v; the 6q'\.lation: P = f V.
Taking as a basis the expressions of P giwen by formula (2)
we find, for our model" the followving values:
V

:::

1,000 m:l

V

:::

5,000 n:.3

V

:::

10,000 m3

V

:::

50,000 m3

V

:=

100,000 rn3

Velocity limit

:::

92.5 km/h

11

11

::::

133

II

"
"
"

n

== 148

II

11

:::

173

n

1/

= 181

11

'Of

~n.

v

=

3
2"00,000 m

V

;;::

300~OOO m3

II

V

=

400,000 m3

n

= 185

km/h

II

= IB5

"

"

;;::

178

If

Velocity limit

As we see., the limit velocity first increases rapidly- with
the incre3.se of cubature) then, aftet reaching a m~-iinum ·of . 185
km/h. for a cubature of frem 200,000 to 300,000 cubic meters,
slowly decreases.
In practice, of course, these values of a"psolute maxrimuin of
veloCity should not be reachedj' in fact, they should not even be
approached.

24.

INFLUENCE OF THE COEFFICIENT OF RESISTANCE AND OF
PROPELLER EFFICIENCY.

In the general expression of P given in f.ormula (2') the
only term which depends on the power, and therefore on the coefficient :of resistance k as well as on the propeller efficiency
'r},
is
[3, V 2

/

f3 being proport ional to

3

= ( f3'
N

+ [3" v 3

)

V?/3

and consequently also to

k ·
iJ

It is therefore easy to see the effects produced by a variation of the ratiO k.
71.

As regards the coefficient of utilization ' p , of course it
increases: as k diminishes and vice versa. 'More eXactly, we may
say that, for ~ given cUbature. the variatiOn · follows a linear
law., as .', is shown by the gene.:ral expression for p . We may 'a.dd · .
that the variayion is more rapid for small cubatures, for which
the term 13· V2 3 acquires greater importance with respect to tne
other terms.
'
The approxdmate expression V-Z / ::: ~ which givesthe cubature:
corresponding to p maximum, thus shows that yvith increase of ~,
P maxdmum is obtained for a larger cubature, and when ~ decreases, p maximum tends towards a smaller cubature.
3

I

The CUBATURE OF MINIMUM CONEUMPTION OR MAAIMUM RANGE remains
unchanged1 This is clearly shown by formula (13) in which V is
independent of f3.

On the other hand, we have notable variations in the distance
limit given by formula (11). Indicating by A a numerical coeffiCient, this may be put in the following form:

- 22 f V -

(

CI

V1/

3

A

+ B .V 2 /
k V273

7j

•

3

+ 'Y V +

v

3

and from this it clearly results that when k increases, the nu~­
erator decreases and, at the same time, the ~enominator in~rease6,
and therefore Lmax decre ases.
On the other hand, when 'I'] decreases, the numerator increases and the denominator decreases,
that is to say, Lmax increases.
Finally, the limit veloc:ity also varies with
ing as, ~ decreases.
25.

k

increas-

Tj'

VARIATIONS OF THE LIMITS OF DISTANCE .AND VELOCITY
FOR aiALL VARIATIONS OF VOLUME.

In order to show more clearly the influence of the increase
of velocity and range on the cost of operation of aerial transport, we will consider a differenoe in volume sufficient 1Y.": small
to enable us to assume that for all intermed.iate cubatures the
coefficient of utilization, p, remains just about constant.
This we oan always. do, even for r ather large differences in volume, when, for instance, we consider the region of the maximum
value of p.
The distance limit, in the above hypothesis is given by:

Lznax =

k V213 2
A'I'f
v

=

Tl
k

and therefore
(14)

v=

from which we may oonclude that for small variations in volume,
the volume is proportiona.l to the cube of the ratio
to the
sixth power of the velocity and to the cube of t be di~tance.
This last result may also be enunciated in a suggestive form as
follows: THE LENGTH OF TIlE AIRSHIP IS PROPORTIONAL TO THE MAXI-

¥.,

MUM DIST ANCE THAT IT CAN COVER.

Thus, for instance, in order to increase the distance limit
by only 10%, we must incree,se the volume by 33%, an:l if we wish
to increase the velocity by only 5%, the cubature must be increased by 35%.

- ae Of course the results are even mOre unfavorable if, in the
differences of volume considered, the value of p decreases, as
is the case when this difference is on the right hand side of the
cubature for which p is maxdmum.
26.

DETERMINATION OF THE MINIMUM CUBATURE
REQUIRED FOR A GIVEN TRIP.

The data of the problem are: the number of passengers
and the distance 1 0 , to be covered without landing.

no,

In round figures we may take 100 k for the weight of each
passenger, comprising therein his part of the weight of the cabin
and cabin fittings and also his part of the foodstuffs.
Then, taking

as the unknown cubature, we shall have:

V

putting more briefly:

The preceding equation solved for
cUbature in function of Lo and no'
We may now ask what value of
value of 10 being established.

V

V,

gives the required

renders

no

ma;:ltimum, the

Solving the first member of the e<::n-1ation and taking it as
equal to zero," we find:
f V = 1 a V
3

1/3

+ 2

3

~

V2

/

3

+

If we compare this equation "vith equation (4), we see, as we
might have antiCipated, that the volume V for which no is maximum, is always less than that for which <I> is ma~;imum and that
the difference of VOlume between no max. and <I> max-. is less a s
the distance La is shorter. We may therefore deduce that for
small values of Lo, the value of V correfP onding to n
maximum is greater than the cubature of minimum consumption. ~n other
words, this ,cubature cannot, in generaJ., be considered as a limit
cubature, a9might appear at a first glance.
The use of tables and diagrams gives a rapid solution of the
problem, as we shall show by a few examples.

- 24 -

1st. Let us consider the transportation of 100 passengers (weight, 10~OOO kg.) in a non-stop flight from Rome to New
York~ (distance about 7200 km.).
'
From the table we find that it iSnot possible to use airships
having a ma¥imum velocity of 120 km/h. ~ and st ill less those of
150 km/h. We will therefore suppose that we have v = 90 km/h., .
and conseq].lently v 0' normal velo~ity of navigation, equal to
about 71. 5 km/h.
Glancing at the table l we may conclude that the required
cUbature (certainly greater than 60(000 cubic meters since for
this value we have Lmax:: 7231 km.) is comprised between 100,000
and 150,000 cubic meters. In point of fact, we have:
.
for 100,000 m. 3

"

~

-

150;t000 m 3

......

=

5,800 kg.

= 12,380. kg.

"

Considering that we must have: ~
pIe interpolation we at once obtain:
V ==

c Lo

-c

t , : 10,000, by a sim0

132,000 m 3

The number of passengers which can be carried over the distance st ated above by airships varying in cubature from 60,000
to 350,000 m3 , is as follows:
no =

1

V

:::

60,000

"

::

100,000

II

=

II

:::

150,000

It

::

124

"

::

200,000

11

::

182

"

:::

250,000

"

::

230

1r

:::

300,000

II

:::

270

\I

:::

350,000

II

::::

300

N

58

2nd. In the previous case, suppose that we make a stop
at the A~ores for the purpose of taking in fuel. Under these
conditions the m~mum distance is reduced to about 3,700 kID.,
and the cubature for v = 90 km/h.
to 45,000 m 3 , instead of
132,000 ~s in the first case.
7

3rd. Let us consider the line London-Paris-M
arseillesRome-Naples-Taranto-Cairo, with stops at London, Rome , Taranto
and Cairo.

--------------~-------------------

- 25 -

There will be non-stop flights having the following lengths:
London-Rome

1635 krn.

Rome-Taranto

460 km .

Tarant o-Cairo

1700 km.

Adopting airships of 130 km/h., we find that with a oubatl.U'e
of 50 ,000 rn 3 we can carry 80 passengers, and with a cubature of
100,000 we can carry 300 passengers, covering the entire distance
in about 40 hours l flight.
4th. Suppose we have a passenger service between Milan
in Italy and Alex.andria in Egypt (distance about 3,400 krn.) operated by airships hav in9 a maximum velocity of 130 km/h. and a
normal velocity of 95 km/h.
For a non-stop flight, we have at once from the table:
for 40,000· rn 3

no =

17

"

60,000 m 3

n

=

55

11

80,000 rn 3

n

=

93

But suppose that we make a stop at Taranto (Milan-Taranto,
km.), the rn~mum distance to
be covered in a non-stop flight is reduced from 2,4.00 to 1,525
km. and we have:
875 km.; Taranto-Alexandria, 1535

for 40,000 m3

59

II

60,000 rn 3

11

:=

118

n

80,000 rn 3

II

=

169

CONCLUSIONS.
1.
The results we have reached in this irr.ve9i igation fully
confirm the essential pOints characterizing the airship: ~ flying machine relatively slow, but capable of oarrying a large
useful load over a long distance.

These charaoteristics are the contrary of those of the airplane, which, in the present state of aerial technical data, is
a machine essentially fast, but which can only carry a relatively small useful load over a relatively short distance.

- a6 There is, therefore, no reason to talk about competition between these t\~o means of aerial locomotion, since they are so es sentially different from each other> each having its own definit e
field of activity J the one serving to complete the other, The
co-existence of airships and airplanes forms a complete solution
of the problem of aerial navigation.
The advantages of airships of large cubature are SO evident
as to justify the greatest h~es for their immediate future. It
should be remarked that it is not too much to hope that the li.mits we have found, and which are already pretty large, will be
exceeded in actual practice, since in our investigation we have
abstained from considering the developments which may confidently be expected from the genius of inventors and the Skill of construmors.
Even w.ithout taking these probable developments into account,
though they are by no mean~ negligible qUw~tities, we se e that
there is a certain limit to the adva~tages of large cubature.
This limitation is due, essentially, to the gradual decrease
of the coefficient of utilization and CONSEQUENTLY OF THE M XIMUM
A
ALTITUDE OF FLIGHT. By increasing the cubature beyonai the pOi:lt
corresponding to p ma)timum, (which our calculations show to be
much smaller than is commonly believed), the m~rnum altitude of
the airship goes on decreaSing, in spite of the fact that the
range of action in a horizontal plane and the useful load go on
in ere as ing.
Now, the possibility of rapid climb is undoubtedly an essential factor of security of aerial navigation in the case of
storms.
.
The other factor of security is veloc·ity.
storm is another way ~r avoiding it.

To run ahead of a

High altitude and high speed are, however, antithetical
terms. It is possible to build airships capable of rising to
high altitudes, but they will, necessarily, have low veloaity,
just ag~ t is poss ible to build. airsh ips having high speed, but
having a low ceiling.
Our investigation leads us to conclude that a maximum velocity of 120 lan/h. is as far as we ought to go. This figure can
only be exceeded by excessive reduction of altitude of ceiling,
range of flight, and useful load.
NOW, at 120 kID/h.) for a cubature of 200,000 ~ubic meters,
we have a coefficient of utilization of 0.31, which, including
the 300 m. of initial rise, corresponds to a ceiling of about
4,000 m. altitude, reached, however, with a zero useful load and

- 27 -

at the end of the flight only, after having consumed the entire
supply of benzine and oil. This ceiling is evidently of relatively low altitude, and we should therefore consider the advi s ability of exoeeding the above given oubature for airships of
this type.
Of course, with decreased velocity there would be an improve ment. For instance, with the same cubature of 200,000 cubic meters and a speed of 90 km/h_, the ceiling would be at about 5,000
m. The gain in altitude would not~ however, altogether oQnpensate for the pronounoed deorease of m~imum velooity.
2. We will now oonsider the use 'of the airship in a public
passenger service.
The essential requisites of a public transport service are
safety and regularity of service.
The first of these re~uirements can undoubtedly be met. We
have only to adopt a cubature large enough for realizing the following three oonditions: (a) the certainty. of being able to rise
rapidly to a height of 1500 or 2000 m. right at the beginning of
navigation; (b) a fuel reserve suffioiently ample to enable the
ship to sail for muoh longer than the anticipated time, should
this be required by the atmospheric conditions; (c) the possibility of developing a relatively high m~mum speed.
When these three conditions are satisfied we may say without
fear of exaggeration that AERIAL NAVIGATION BY AIRSHIPS IS SAFER
THAN MARITIME NAVIGATION. As a matter of fact, a ship on the
water cannot rise above the gale as an airship can.
The necessity of satisfying all three conditions at the same
time, leads us to conclude, on the basis of our calculations,
that under the present conditions of aerotechnics it is not advisable with airships used for passenger service, to exceed a normal flying speed of 80 or 90 km/h. or a non-stop flight of more
than 3000 to 4000 km. In other words, we are convinced that the
best cubature to adopt is not that which aims at increasing the
length of non-stop flights or of the speed of flight, but rather
that which aims at safety in navigation by increasing the supply
of benzzine and the amount of ballast.
The requisite of regularity, meaning thereby starting and
arriving at schedule time, is, for the airship, intimately connected with the question of safe navigation, since, when this is
assured we may, in a large measure, count on the flight being
acaomplished within the stated time. It cannot, however, be denied that, aerial navigation be ing st ill largely dependent on atmospheric conditions, a strict adherence to schedule time can only be guarantee~ if the service is limited. to the most favorable

- 28 -

sea.son of the year, though it may be re!lJ.arked.. that the regule,ri t:r
of the maritime senrice is also influenced by weather aond h;~, o:::s
in a certain measure.
We may hope that airsnlps will be much less affected by
weather conditions when, in the near future, the problem of m
echanical mooring, housing', and getting the sh ip out of its haYlg"1.~
has been satisfac;torj:ly solved.
3. It is thus possible to assure an airship service offe r:;'ng
the most absolute guarantees for security of flight and al so,
within practical limits, regularity of service. We must now con -sider the question from the economical point of wiew.
We do not deem it necessary to enter here into an analysis
of the unit cost of aerial transportation, but we may certainly
affirm that, in most cases, the cost of aerial transport will
necessarily be greater* than transport by land or ~ater, especially when , as in a public service, satisfactcry-.-· ~egulari ty and
absolute safety are req~ireQ.
But in judging the economical aspect of transportation, we
must consider not only cash outlay, but also another essential
factor" namely, speed.
Considering the question from this point of view, we shall
not be so foolish as to pretend that the airship competes with
the railway or motor-car unless (~~d such cases are not rare) over
difficult or mountainous country or where business is limited.
In these cases the aerial service would show a considerable saving of time as compared with other means of transport, either on
account of the airship being able to take the most direct route
or on ace.o unt of greater speed.
Also, we need not be surprised if in such characteristic
cases the cost of aerial transport should prove to be less thar~
the cost of transport by rail or motor-car. For instance, if
the line is intended to link up two places difficult of acces s ,
far distant from each other, and having only sufficient busines s
to warrant, say, a bi-weekly service. Under these conditions it
is quite certain that the cost of establishing and running an
aerial line would be much less than that of laying a railway or
making routes for motor-cars.
E~oe pt for the exceptional cases just mentioned, we believe
that AN AERIAL SERVICE WITH AIRSH IPS IS ESPECIPL LY AND PART lCULARLY SUITABLE FOR FLIGHTS OVER LARGE EXPANSES OF WATER.
* And greater generally vvith airplanes than with airships. This
statement:; may seem, at first sight, rather paradoxical, but
it can easily be proved by even a summary analysis of the cost
of transport.

We must here ' distinguish between short distance . and long
distanoe flights.
In the first cass, it is evident that we can attain a high
flying speed, thereby obtaining a oonsiderable advantage over t he
usual maritime service, whether over seas or lakes. Suoh may be
the case, for instance, for a line Rome-Cagliari, or Rome-Tripoli,
or Rome-Palermo.
For a longer distanoe, we must, on account of the reasons
given above, reduce our speed, but, in any case, we may take it
that the journey will be completed in about half of the time re quired by the fastest ships.

The question now arises whether this gain in speed as compared with maritime navigation is such as to compensate for the
greater cost and the inevitable decrease in comfort.
The answer to this cpery cannot be doubtful. When the safety
of the journey is assured and there are regular departures (two
conditions which, as we have seen, can be aomplied with) passengers will certainly not be lacking.
Concerning the question of departures at stated times, we may
remark that for. long journeys OVer the sea, puncrtuality in leav-ing according to a pre-arranged time-table is of less importance
than for short journeys. That is to say, the departure of an
airship need not be announced muoh ahead of the time, nor need
the departures be arranged aooording to a fixed time-table. It
will be suff:lcient if the time of departure is announced two or
three days beforehand, so as to give intending passengers time to
prepare, and to decide whether they will travel by air or by the
usual maritime service. This consideration is of some importance" since it meets the objection raised that aerial tran~port
being, as it is, dependent on the weather, cannot compete commercially with maritime navigation.
4.

THE AIRSHIP FOR TOURISTS.

In this field the airship has a unique position~ surpassing
even the airplane. The airship tourist service cannot fail to
develop and flourish since it requires only a small capital and
combines large profits with absolute security of investment.
Such a service is espeCially important in oountries like
Italy, where there is always a great influx of visitors from
abroad. We are convinced that a well organized system of touring
airships, especia ly in tourist centers, would not only be successful from an investor's point of ~iewJ but would also react
favorably on the general economic conditions of the country .

-

30 -

The following considerations justify the theory that a tourist service vlith airships is capable of being developed under
the most favorable conc1itions.
1st . The sensat ion of absolute security given by an a.i :.~-·
ship in comparison with that felt in other mocies of flight., cannot fail to attract a large numoer of tourists.
2nd. For passenger transport the airship offers much
greater convenience and comfort th~~ the airplane; also, the
airship can slaw down during flight or even rerr.ain stationary in
the air, thus allowing greater enjoyment of the panorama.
3rd. The risks of navigation are reduced to a minimum,
or even altogether eliminated, since the tourist service will
only operate in suitable weather.
4th. The cost of terminal st8.tions, material and personnel e?re reduced to a minimum, especially for short dls"t;ance
flights such as Rome-Naples, Bay of Naples, tbe 1t,?~ian Rivlera,
Sicily, etc. For longer fligh'cs, sucll as Rome-Co~. stantinople ,
Rome-Cairo, Rome-Paris, etc . , these items will amount to more.
5th. Considering the clasa of passengers who will be
catered for, the rates charged may be fixed at a sufficiently remunerative figure.
5.

RIGID AND SEMI-RIGID AIRS£IPS.

We will conclude this study by a rapid comparison between
the two types of airships which are today contending for 8.lpremacy ': the semi-rigid Italian type and the rigid German type.
Of the Italian semi-rigid type there are ,.tw·o classes, one
having an art iculated longitudinal beam, the other, a. rigid long i tudinal be am.
While for small cubatures, the a~solute superiority of our
articulated beam type is generally recognized (and proved by the
numerous reqpests from foreign Governments for sample airships of
this type and the appreciations of them ekpresseci in the official
organs of those Governments~~ many experts and especially many
amateurs maintain that, even for large cubatures l the Italian
semi-rigid type can successfully compete with the German rigid

type..

* Our Aeronautical Construction Works has just completed' an M type
airship for England, and two 0 types, one for the U.S.A., the
other for the Argentine. Another of the same type is being built
for Spain. The 0 type, derived from the P type, (Crocco-Riccaldoni) may be comsidered as the most succeclsrlJl.l of ItaJ.ian small
aubature' aireh ips. It was de signed by Engineers Pe see and Nobi~ .

- 31 -

Though there may be a doubt in the matter as regards the articulated type, there can be none whatever as regards the rigid
type, as.shown by the brilliant success of our experience with our
first T type airship. We are convinced that to whatever dimensions our T type may be increa6e~ (within the limits suggeste d
in this study) we shall always find that the particular characteristics w.hich constitute its fundamentally good qualities are not
only pre servect, but even accentuated.
Of course, we do not say that great increase of cubature cran
be made without giving rise to difficulties. When the cubature
exceeds 100,000 cubio meters the problems of construction and assemblage take on a certain importance, but though these problems
may be difficult of solution they are never such as to lead:. to unfavorable oondi tiona.
We consider that the essential rearo n why our type is superior to the German, lies in the conception of the rigi~ty itself.
In the German type, the whole of the external surface is made rigid, even where the natural pressure of the gas is suffi~ient to
preserve the shape. The Italians only make rigid those parts
which really re~ire such treatment, thus greatly simplifying construction and assembling w.hich more than oompensates for the
slight disadvantage of a less penetrating form. Moreover~ as regards the preservation of the form, the rigid type does not appear to have muoh advantage over the Italian semi-rigid, since,
with the rigid bow of the T type the excess pressure of the gas
in the envelope: can be maintained relatively lOW, w"ithout fear ,
of any inconvenience arising either during navigation or during
mooring ope rat iona.
The superiority of the Italian conception appears, however~
not merely in simpler c:onstruat ion, but alB:>, and more e speoially~ in greater strength.
This is evident when we compare the
HUGE~ DELICATE, FRAGILE ARRANGEMENT formed by the metallic framework of the Zeppelins with THE STRONG> ELASTIC BACKBONE formed
by the longituddnal beam of the Italian type. This backbone is
STRONG because its parts, being relatively small and ~xposed, to
great forces, have a resistance which we shall seek in vain in
the framework of. the aeppelin. It is ELAST la, beCause it s art 1culated jOints, the pe~uliar characteristia of our longitudinal
beam, give it an elastioity which enables the ai~p to withstand
shocks, and bumps, while the ZeplJelin, as experience has proved,
oannot support such shocks without serious damage.
These are the two most important advantages of the Italian
type over the German type. We may also mention the following:
1st.

Rapidity and certainty in designing.

2nd.

Rapidity of construotion and utilization of materials of current use and aonstant characteristics.

- 32 3rd.

Great rapi<iity and simplicity of mounting .

4th. Possibility of taking the airship to pieces r f~pii l~'
e::ither for purposes of storage or transport vfhen it is not advi s able to send it unde~ its own power. We may note that the Ze p pelin cannot be taken apart.
5th. Possibility in the future of assembling the airship
outside the hangar.
In fact, the assembling of our longitud:inal
beam complete with all its acc.esaories, comprising the stiffening
of the bOW, the pO'v7er plant, rudders, etc., cran be done without
inconvenienca in the open air if it is protected from the weather
by a temporary covering of limited dlmensi. ons. When the rigid.
part is assembled we can, given favorable oonditions and fine
weather , proceed. rapidly to the inflation of the envelope and to
its connection with the rigid part. After this, the airShip may
be ready in a few days, if not to fly, at least to be moored so
that the final adjustments may be made without d~~ger.
6th. Great faoility of inspection and repairing of single metallic parts. This considerable advantage arises immediately from the fact that the rigid part ocaupies only a small
space, and alro that the various part s are articulated together,
so that a damaged part c.an easily be ohanged.
7th. Lower cost of construction and assembling. We need
not dwell on this pOint. Greater rapidity of construction and
assembling together with the use of current materials must conduce
to a lower cost of production.
This advantage, however, must be set .off against the cost of
operation. As a matter of fact, in the Italian type, when , from
any cause, the ga.s bag becomes ineffid.ent, it must be entirely
renewed. It is certain that to change' one of the gas compart.ments of the Zeppe.,lin is a much less costly opera.tion, but, on
the other hand, when we consider that the cost of upkeep of the
rigid part is much less in the Italian type, we come to the onnelusion that J on the vvhole, the upkeep of a Zeppelin is more
costly than the upkeep of an Italian airship.
In summing up all the advantages. of an Italian airship over
a Zeppelin, we must, however, admit that in one point the latter
are superior, namely, in the coefficient of head resistance.
But we are convinced that this inferiority will so on be eliminated
by successive improwements in the Italian type of airships.
Rome, December, 1920.
Tr ~ s lated by P a ris O ice, N.A.C.A.
n
ff

- 33 -

I.

TABLE

WEIGHT OF THE VARIOUS PAltTS OF THE AIRSHIP
I N FUNCTION OF VOLUME AND SPEED.
p

= V1 / 3

+ ( 13 f + 13 II v 3

(p in kg.;

)

V

in m. 3

•
• a. V 1 /

PARTS

+ (ry'

V2/a

;

v in km/h.)

•
S

'Y H v 2 ) V + 5 V4./ 3

1-

f3 V;Z / 3

;--------------

S'
Env.elope with all accessory organs inoluding
valves and valve oontroIs
Stiffening of bow

2.410

.

Stabilizers and rudders:
with controls ..

Longitudinal Beam

.

"

Accessories of longitudinal beam (covering, gangway, sh o<t'k
absorbers

Power

plan~

·
·

0.374

with sup-

ports

Maneuvering devioes
Plant for lighting,
wireless, ventilators

0.190

Pilot's oabin

0.300

Crew

20.0

Engine spare parts
and tools
Reserve ballast and
ballast for in it ial
climb of 300 m.

·

.

: -'ct-=-2-4""'-.-5-!.~-"'~, ' ;:: 3. 874 : f3 Ii = 10 - s

.
.

3 • 51

r---------------------------------------------------------------------- - - 34 TABLE

I (Cont.)

WEIGHT OF THE VARIOUS PARTS OF THE AIRSHIP

IN FUNCTION OF VOLUME AND SPEED.
p == V l / 3

+ ( ~ I + j3 It

V 3)

(p i~ kg.;

V 2. /3

+ ('Y' + 'Y" v 2

V. in m. 3

,

PARTS

;

V

+

6 V4 /

3

v in km/h.)

~ V

5
2
L" v

'Y
with all accessory organs inclu&-:
irlg valves and valve
controls

)

Vj4/S

.

En~elope

0.00374

0.008
10- 6 1.3 v2.

·
·
·
·
rudders:

St iffening of bow
Stabilizers and
with controls

0.047

Longitudinal Beam

0.022

10- 6 0.5 v 2

Accessories of longi- :
tudina1 beam (covering:
gangway, shocrk absorb-:
.~ e rs)

0..003

10 -6 1.3 v :2

0.00236

Power plant with supports '
Maneuve ring devices

.
.

:

0.00060

:

Plant for lighting,
wireless" vent ilators
Pilot's cabin
Crew

·
·

0.007

0.003

Engine spare part s
and tools

Reserve ballast and

ballast fo r initial
elim p of 300 m.

:
:
Q.070 :
II
'Y. = 0.160: 'Y =10- 6 3.1:

6 == 0 .0067

b

- 35 TABLE II.
Maximum Velocity,

90 km/h.

Normal Veloc~ity of Flight, about 72 Em/h.
:Useful
:Coeffic~!Fue1 & . Limit
. No. of
:No. of
: lifting
: ient of :oil per:distance:passengers:passenCubature:force (for:utiliza-:
km.:
:for 1000 kmgers for
:f = 1100 .
tion : :
:5000 km.
kg/m. 3

.

<I>

5~000

10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30~000

35,000
40,000
45,000
50;000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
100,000
125,,000
150,000
175,000
200,000
225,000
250,000
275,000
300,000
325,000
350,000

~

kg.

1,877
4,472
7,095
9,700
12,275
14,813
17,312
19,775
22',202
24., S8~
29,26433,806
38,226
42,406
46,699
56,693
66,083
74,923
83,258
91,118
98,541
105,548
112,164
118" 407
124,299

p

c kK.:

0.3411
0.4005
0.4300
0.4409
0.4.4 63
0.4489
0.4497
0.4494
0.4485
0.4471
0.4434
0.4390
0.4344
0.4283
0.4245
0.4123
0.4005

0.772:
1.226:
1. 606:
1.946:
2.258 :
2.550 :
2.826:
3.089:
3.341 :
3.584:
4.04.7 :

0.38~2l
0.378~

0.3681
0.3583
0.3489
013399
0.3312
0.323:9

444B5:!

4.903:
5.304-:
5.690 :
6.602:
7..456:
8.263 :
9.033:
9. 770:
10.480 :
11.16.9:
11. 835:
13.484:
. 13 .t 116:

L kID .
?,431
3,647
4,418
4" 985
5,436
5,809
6,136
6,402
6,64$
6.861
7,231
7,538
7,796
7,,995
8,207
8,587
8.863
9:067
9,,2218
9,326
9,403
9,450
9,477
9 485
9,477
1

11
32
55
77
100
123
145
167
189
210
252
293
333
371
410
501
586
667
742
81~

881
944
1,003
1,059
1,112'

o

.'

o
o
o
o

21
32
43
55
67
90
114
137
159
182
237
288
336
381
423
.461
, 497
530
560
587

- 36 -

Velocity,

M~mum

120 km/h.

Normal Velocity of Flight, about 95 km/h .

·
·
Cubature:

No. of
Usafu1 :Coeffic-:Fuel and: Limit · No. of
·
:distance :passengers ' :passen ~ ,
lifting :ient of
oil
force :utiliza~:per km.
for
:gers for
1,000 km. :3,000 km.
tion
,

V m

3

·
·

5,000:
10,000:
15,000:
20,000:
25",000:
30,000 =
35,000:
40 ,000:
45,000 :
50,000:
60 ,000:

.

~

f,
,

,

..

kg .

p0.1378
758
0.2413
2,654
O.283Q
4,678
6,737
0.3062
8,80Z'
0.3200
0.3290
10,8~
12,895 . 0.3349
14,914: : 0.3389
16,911
0.3416
18,881
0.3433
22,751
0.3447
<I>

c kg.

L kIn.
552
1,218
1,638
1,948

L373
2.179
2 . 855
3.459
4. 014
4.53Z
5.023
5.491
5.939
6.371
7.195

2,1~3

0

5
18
33
48

2,3 6
2,567
2,716
2,847
2,963
3,162
3,326 ·
3,464 , :
3,574
3.683
3,881
4,025
4,128

185
215
243
271
338
401
459

70,000 : 26,522
0.3444:
80,000: 30,197 : 0.3431.
90,000: 33,6.91, : 0.3403
100,000: 37,246
0.3386
125,000 : 45,553
0.3313
150,000 : 53,335
0.3232:
175,000 : , 60,629
0.3149
000,000 : 67,4$8
0.3066225,000: 73,87a
0 .. 2985
2:50 , 000 : 79,877
0.290S
275,000: 85,496
0.2aaS
300,000: 90,752:
0 .. 27!?0

16.055

4,aO~

514

17.365
18.630
19.85a
21.037

4)2544,287
4,307
4 1 314

565
61Z
65e
697

325,000 : 95,660
;3.5() :I 000 : 100,237

22.190
23.314

4,311
4,299

735
769

0.2676
0.2604

7.973
8.716
9.428
10.114
11. 736
13.252
14.687

6a
79
94
110
125
156

.
.

.

4

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

°
°

12

26
40

54
69
103
136
166
193
218
240
259
276
291
303

- 37 -

TABLE
Ma.x..imum

IV.

Ve1o~ity,

150 km/h.

Normal Velocity of Flightt, about

119 km/h.

,
No . of . No. of
Useful :Coeffic-:Fue1 and:Limit
. lifting :ient of
oil : d-istance :passengers :passer.:gers fo r
for
:utiliza-:per km.
Cubature: "f oree
1000 tm.
500 km.
:tion
",

.

3

V m
5.,000
10,000
15,,000

ao,ooo

2.:5,000
~O)ooo

35,,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
60,000
70 , 000
80,000
90,000
100,000
12"5,000

~

e

kg.

-1,063
- 289
772
1,957
a, 3".10
4,496
5,800
7,113
8,42:8
9,7~5

12,331
14,883
17,3:84
19,7433
2~, 19~

2i7 1 850

c kg.

-0.296
-0.02.6 .
0.0468:
0.0889:
0.110,7:
0.136Z:
0.1506:
0 .. 1617:
0.1683:
0.1770 :
0.1868:
0.1932':
0.1975:
0.1994:
0. a017:
0.202'5.:

.

""

4.46.1
5.40Ei :
a.a71
7.083
7.848
8.579

1

9.955
11. 242"
12.458
13.618
14.730
15.80Z'
18.337

·

20.707
22.948
25.085
27.134
29.109
31.019

1,599 ,
1,656 ":
1,6:94
1,719
1,729
1 t 786

228
265
298
33.1
358
384

124
150
174
195
212
229

1,735
1,7a71

407
425
442:

242
2 52
a60

9.Z79

0.2007 :
0.1974:
0.1932 :
0.1884:
0.1830:
0.178a:

300,000
325,000
3:;?0,000

57,045
59,883
62,426

0 .. 1729: 32.871
0.1675: 34.6.73.0.1621: 36.44=9

\"

°

514

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

73.9
829
908
978
,
1,097 ·
1,195) "
:
1, a176 ·
·
1,340 ":
1)404: :
1,519 ,

33,115
37,993
42,497
46,638
50,335
53,899

J.

0

1733623

10
19
2:8
S..8
53
67
87
106
1241:
143
187

150,000
175,000
200,000
225,000
2.50,000
275,000

m

L km.

6~5

1/7?l3 ."

.
,

.

"
,

°

11
0'4
38

50-..

64
· 95

