REPORT No. 25.
Nomenclature

FOR AERONAUTICS.

By the NATIOXAL
ADVISORY
CCWIITISE ~EROXAUTIC8.
POE
INTRODUCI’ION.

The following nomenoIature was adopted by the NationaI Adtiory Committee for Aeronautics at its anmd meet~u October 10, 1918.
The purpose of its adoption and publication is to heIp sec~e uniformity in the official
documents of the Government ns well as in the technical jonrnsk.

.

AERONAUTICAL NOMENCL4TUEE.

hzRoForL: A winglike structure, flat or curved, designed to obtain reaction upon ita snrfaces
from the air through which it mov=.
AEMFOrL SEOTION: section of an aerofofi made by a plane partiel to the phne of symmetry
A
of the aerofoiL
AmOPLAm: See Airplane.
.kLERON: A movable auxiliary surface, nsudly part of the trailing edge of a wing, the function
of which is to control the lateral attitude of an airphme by rotating it about its longitudinal
X&.
AIEWMm: Any form of ordft designed for the navigation of the air-airplanes, airships, balloons,
helicopters, kites, kite balloons, ornithoptere, gliders, etc.
kRPLANE: A form of aircraft heatier than air which has wing surfaces for support in the air,
with stabilizing surfaces, rudders for steering, and power plant for propulsion through the
air. This term is commonly used in a more restricted sense to refer to airplanes fitted with
landing gear suited to operation from the Iand. If the Ianding gear is suited to operation
from the water, the term “seaplane” is used. (See definition.)
PusLT.—A type of airplane with the propeller in the rear of the engine.
Tractor.-A type of airplane with the propdler in front of the engge.
AmSFIIP:A form of balloon, the outer envelope of which is of elongated form, provided with a
propelling syst+xn, car, ~ddere, and stabili&g surfaces.
Nonrigid.-An airship whose form is maintained by the pressure of the contained gas
wisted by the car+uspension system.
Ri@.-An
airship whose form is maintained by a rigid structure contained within the
envelope.
Serniri@L-h
aimhip whose form is maintained by means of a rigid keel and by gas
DreSsure.
ADMP;ED METER:An instrument designed to measure the speed of an aircraft with reference
to the air.
ALTIMETER: n aneroid mounted on an aircraft to indicate continuously its height above the
A
surface of the earth. Its dial is marked in feet, yards, or meters.
ANEMOMETER:
Any instmgnent for measuring the velocity of the wind.
AIWLE:
Of attucii (or of koidence) of an aerofoil.—The acute angle between the ckection of the
relative wind and the ohord of an aerofoil; i. e., the s.qgle between the chord of an
aerofoil and its. motion rehitive to the air. (This definition may be extended to any
body having an axis.)
CriticaL-The @
of attack at which the lift-curve has ita first maximum; sometimes
referred to as the “burble point.”
GZMiw.-l%e angle the flight path makes with the horizontal when descendhg in still air
under the influenoe of gra~ty alone; i. e., without power from the engine.
70

-.—

.-

——

.—
.—

—
.-.

—
-=

—

NOMJ3N’OIATURE
FORAERONAUTICS

.

71

ANGLEor IFWIDEXOE dtiectiom for rigging): In the process of rigging an airp~ane some
(in
arbitrary detlnite line in the airplane is kept horizontal; the angle of incidence of a wing,
or of any aerofoil, is the @
between its chord and this horizontal line, which usualIy is
the line of the upper longitudimds of the fuseIage or na.de.
APPE.NDIX:
The hose at the bottom of a balloon used for inflation. In the case of a spherical
balloon it also serves for equalization of pressure.
.ksPEcr RATIO:The ratio of span to chord of am aercfofl.
AmzmJDE: The attitude of an aircraft is determined by the inchoation of its axes to the “frame
of reference”; e. g., the earth, or the dative wind.
AVIATOR:The operator or pilot of heavier-than-air cr=ft. T’his term is applied regardless of
of the sex of the operator.
..Es OF AN mvxamr: ti
fixed lines of reference; usu~y centroidal and mutua~y rectlmguhw.
The principal longitudinal axis in the pIane of symmetry, usually parallel to the axis of
the propdler, is called the lonqitudinul ati; the axis perpendicular to this in the plane of
symmetry is called the mmnuz$
axis; and the third axis, perpendicular to the other two, is
called the ?&ml axis. h mathematical discussions the fust of these axes, drawn from front
to rear, is called the X axis; the second, drawn upward, the Z ti;
and the third, running
from right to left, the Y axis.
“BALMWING
FLAPS:See Aileron.
BALLONET: small IxilIoon within the interior of a balloon or airship for the purpose of ccmA
trcdling the ascent or descent and for maintaining pressure on the outer envelope so as to
prevent deformation. The baIIonet is kept Mated with air at the required pressure, ugder
the control of valves by a blower or by the action of the wind caught in an air-scoop.
BALLOON: form of aircraft comprising a gas bag, rigging and a basket. The support in the
A
air rmlts from the buoyancy of the air dispIaced by the gas bag, the form of which is
maintained by the pressure of a contained gas lighter than air.
Barrqe.-A
small sphticd captive b~oon, rfi~
= a protection ag~t
attach by
airplanes.
Captive.-A balloon restrained from free &ght by means of a cable attaching it to the
earth
Kite.-h
elongated form of captive balloon, fitted with tail appendages to keep it headed
into the wind, and deriving increased lift due to its axis being inclined to the wind.
PW. -A small spherical balloon sent up to show the direction of the wind.
Sounding.-A smaU spherical balloon sent aloft without passengers but with regist&ng
meteorological instruments.
BA~ON BED: A mooring place on the ground for a captive baMoon.
BALLOON
OLoti: The cloth, usually cotton, of which baIIoon fabrics are made.
BALLOON
FABBIC:The finished material, usually rubberized, of which balloon enve?opes are
made.
BANK: To incline an airplane Iatmally-i. e., to roll it about the lo~tu~al
*.
Rii@
bank is to incline the airphne with the right wing down. Also used ss a noun to dwribe
the position of an airplane when its lateral axis is inclined to the horizontal
BANK, ANGLE OF: The angle through which an aircraft must be rotated about its longitudinal
axis in order to bring its lateral axis into the horizontal plane.
BAROGRAPH: instrument used to record variations in barometric pressure. Ih aeronautics
An
the charts on which the records me made indicate altitudes directly instead of barometric
pressures.
BASKET:The car suspended beneath a balloon, for passengers, ballast, etc.
BIPLANE:A form of airplane in which the main supporting surface is divided into two parts,
one above the other.
BODY OF AN MRPL4NE: See Fuselage and Nacelle.

— .—
,--—----.

.-

-.
.
---

,.

.

. ..— --

-.

.

—L

.— -—-. -—-—
—.
.T

-

—.. =

—

—

72

ANKUALREPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOE AERONAUTICS.

The appliance, having the fonq of a parasol, which protects the valve of a spherical
balloon against rain.
BRIDLE:The system of attachment of cable to a balloon, includiug lines to the suspension band.
BULL’S-EYES:SmaUrings of wood, metal, etc., forming part of balloon rigging, used for confection or adjustment of ropes.
Bmmm Pormr: See Angle, critical.
CABANE:A pyramidal framework upon the wing of an airphme, to which stap, etc., are secured.
CAMBER:The convexity or rise of the curve of an aerofoil from its chord, usually expressed as
the ratio of the maximum departure of the cume from the chord to the length of the chord.
“Top camber” refers to the top surface of an aerofoil, and ‘(bottom camber” to the bottom
surface; “ mesn camber” is the mean of these two.
CMAcn.m: See Load. The cubic ccmtents of a bdhmn.
CkmNG: f%rvice.-The height above sea level at which a given aircraft ceases to rise at a rate
higher than a small spectied one, say 100 feet per minute. This specified rate maybe different in the services of d.iilerent countries.
AiisoWe.-The maximum height above sea level to which a given aircraft can rise.
Z7woretid.-!l?he limiting height to which a given aircraft can rise determined by computations of performance, based upon the drawinga and wind tunnel data.
timER
OF PRESSURE OF AN ii?momm:
The pointi
the plane of the chords of an aerofoil,
prolonged if necessary, through which at any given attitude the line of action of the resultant
air force passes. (This definition may be extended to any body.)
(%ORD OF AN AEROFOIL
SEOrIOH
:
For theoreticalpurpo8e8.—The zero lift line, i. e., the limiting position, in the section, of the
line of action of the resultant air force when the position of the section is such that the
lift ia zero.
Practic.al.-The line of a straightedge brought ‘tito contact with the lower surface of the
In the case of an aerofoil having double convex camber,
section at points near its edge.
the straight line joining the entering and trailing edges.
Length.-The len@ of the chord is the length of the projection of the aerofoil section on
its chord.
Cknromrrn: See Inclinometer.
CbNOENTRATION
EING: A hoop to which are attached the rop~ sumnd~
the bmket Of a
spherical balloon.
Cknmmou: A general term applying to the means provided for oparating the devices used to
controI speed, direction of flight, and attitude of an aircraft.
CknrmtoLuoLmim: The vertictd lever by means of which certain of the principal controls are
operated, usually those for pitching and rolling.
(laoss-wnm mRcE: The component perpendicular to the lift and to the drag of the total force
on an aircraft due to the air through which it moves.
Chow’s-moT: A system of diverging short ropes for distributing the pull of a single rope.
DEOMAGE: The angle between the chords of the principal and the tail planes of a monoplane.
The same term may be applied to the corresponding angle between the direction of the chord
or chords of a bip~ane and the direction of a tail plane. (’l!his angle is also sometimes known
as the longitudinal V of the two planea.)
DmEDBALm u AIRPLANE: he angle included at the intersection of the imaginary surfaces
T
containing the chords of the right and left planes (continued to the plane of symmetry if
necessary). This angle is measured in a plane perpendicular to that intemection. The
measure of the dihedral is taken as 90° minus one-hilf of We ugle as defined.
The dihedral of the upper planes may and frequently does differ from that of the lower
planes in a biplane.
DIRIGIBLE:See Airship.
Drvma RUDDER: ee Elevator.
S
BONNET:

~

“. .-

‘-

“”

__..

_

b

NOM31NOLATURE FOE AEROITAUTIOS.

73

DOPE: A general term applied to the matarial used in treating the cloth surface of airplane
members and baUoons to increase strength, produce tautness, and act es a filler to maintain
ak-tightness; it usually has a cellulose base.
DRAG: The component parallel to the relative wind of the total force on an aerofoil or aircraft
due to the air through which it mows.
In the case of an airplane, that part of the drag due to the wingg is called” wing resistance”;
that due to the rest of the ~lane
is rolled “ parssite resistance.”
DRI~: See Drag. AIso used as synonymous with “kxnvay,” q. v.
DRnm METER:Au instrument for the measurement of the angular deviation of au aircraft
from a set course, due to cross winds.
DRm ammt: A curtain around the equator of a balloon, which prevents rain from dripping
into the basket.
DROOP: A permanent warp of an aerofoil such that the angle of attack increases toward the
wing tips. (The opposite of “wash out “.)
ELEVATOR: movable tmxili~ surface, usually attached to the tail, the function of which is
A
to control the longgtudiual attitude of an aircraft by rotating it about ita lateral axis.
EMPENNAQE:
The tail surfaces of an aircraft. Sometimes the vrord is limited to the fied
stab~v
portion of the tail-usually comprising the tail plane and vertical &, to which
are attached the elevator and rudders.
E~TERII.ia~D~E: The foremost edge of an aerofoil or propeLlerblade.
EA~mcnm: The outer covering of a riggd airship; or, in the csse of a balloon or a nonrigid
airship, the gas bag which contains the gas.
tiNoR:
The largest horizontal circle of a spherical balloon.
F%: SmalI fixed aerofoils attached to different parts of aircraft, in order to promote stability;
for example, tail iins, skid fins, etc. Fins are often adjustable. They may be either horizontal or vertical.
FLIWT PATH: The path of the center of gravity of em aircraft with reference to the earth.
FLOAT: That portion of the landirg gem of an aircraft which provides buoyancy when it is
restiwg on the surface of the water.
FUSELAGE: he elongated structure to which are attached the lading gear, wings and tail.
T
A fuselage is rarely used with pushers; and in general it is desigged to hold the psssen&rs:
G-: The shortest distance between the planes of the chords of the-upper tid lower pIanee of a
biplane, measured along a line perpendicular to the chord of the lower plane at its entering
edge.
GM BAG: See Envelope.
GLIDE: To fly without engine power.
Gmmm: A form of aircraft similar to an airplane, but without any power plant.
When utiIized in variable winds it makes use of the soaring principles of fright and is sometimes called a soaring machine.
GDmG u-cmz: See Angle, glilirg.
GoRE: One of the segments of fabric composiqg the envelope.
GROUND
ormm: Canvas placed on the ground to protect a balloon.
G~E ROPE: The long trailing rope attached to a spherical balloon or airship, to serve as a
brake and as a variable ballast.
Gu-r: A rope, chain, wire or rod attached to an object to guide or steady it, such as guys to
*,
tti, or lan~u gear.
HANG=: A shed for housing airships or airplanes.
HELIOOPTEE: form of aircraft whose support in the air is derived from the verticsl thrust of
A
propehrs.
HORN: A short arm fastened to a movable part of an airplane, serving es a lever arm, e. g.,
aihwon horn, rudder horn, elevator horn.
HULLOF u- nsnm:
The main structure of a rigid airship, consisting of a covered elongated
framework which incloses the gas bags and which supports the nacelles and equipment.

—..=
-.-—
-—-—

.+.

-- -—
—.- ,.—...
.—
-.

._. -

-~
——
.._
.——

,.<:.=
..—.—
-- —

-

--

~

-.

..-

74

ANNUAL
REPORT
NATIONAL
ADmSORY
COMJ.WITTIU!I MIRONAUTICS.
FOFi

lNOLINOMmER: n instrument for measuring the angle made by any axis of an aircraft with
A
the horizontal, often called a clinometer.
lNSPECTION
wnmow: A small transparent window in the envelope of a balloon or in the wing
of an ~irplane to alIow inspection of the interior.
KITE: A form of aircraft without other propelling means than the towline pull, whose support
is derived from the force of the wind moving past its surface.
hm~
GEAR:The understructure of an aircraft designed to carry the load when resting on
or running on the surface of the land or water.
LEADINC+
EO~E: See Entering edge.
LEEWAY: The angular deviation from a set course over the earth, due to crossicurrente of wind,
also called drift; hence, “drift meta.”
LIFT: The component of the total force due to the. air resolved perpendicular to the relative
wind and in the plane of symmetry.
Lmr OF AN AIRSHIP:
Dynarni.c.-The component of the totnl form on an airship due to the air through which it
movw, resolved perpendicular to the relative wind and in the plane including the direction of the relative wind and the longitudinal axis.
Static.-The vertical upward force on an airship when at rest in the air, due to buoyancy.
Lnrr BRACING: See Stay,

-.

LOAD:

D?u.c?.-The structure, power plant; and essential iccessorks of an aircraft. lncluded in this
are the water in the radiator, tachometer, thermometer, gauges, air-speed indicatm, levti~
altim&er, compass, watch, and hand startar.
FldL—The total weight of an aircraft when loaded to the maximum authorized loading of
—
that particular typs.
U’s#id.-The excess of the full load over the dead-weighbf the aircraft itself. Therefore
useful load includes the crew and passengers, oil and fuel, electric-light installation, chart
board, gun mounts, bomb stmage and releasing gear, wireless apparatus, etc.
LoADm~: See Wing loading.
LOBES:Bags at the stem of an elongated balloon designed to give it directional stability.
LONGERON: Longitudinal.
See
LONQmUDINAL: fore-and-aft member of the framing of an airplane body or of the floate,
A
usually continuous acro~ a number of points of support.
LOOP)A: An aerial maneuvm in which the airplane describes an approximatdy circular path
in the pkne of the longitudinal and normal axes, the lateral axis remaining horizontal, and
the upper side of the airplane remaining on the inside of the circle.
MAROUFLAGE.
Theproc& of wrapping and winding wooden parts in cio”~.
MONOPLANE: form of airplane which has but one main supporting surface extending equally
A
on each side of the body.
MooRm~ WD: The band of tape over tlm top of a balloon to which are attached the mooring
rope9.
~AOELLE: The inclosed shelter for pawngers or for amengine. Usually in the case of a singleengine pusher it is the central structure to which the wings and landing gear are attached.
lTET: A rigging mtide of ropes and twine on spherical balIoogs which supports the entirg load
carried.
ORNITHOPTER: form of aircraft deriving ita support and propelling force from flapping wings.
A
OVERHANG:
One-half the difference in the span of the upper and lower planes of U. iplane.
b
PANCAKE: o “level off” an airplane, just before landing, at too great an altitude, thus stallT
ing it and causing it to descend with the wings at a very huge tingle of incidence.
PANEL:The unit piece of fabric of which the envelope is made.
PABACHUTE: apparatus, made Iike an umbrella, used to retard the descant of a falling body.
An
PATCHSYSTEM: system of construction in which patches (or adhesive flaps) are used in
A
place of the suspension band.

.—

N’OMEIWLM!UBE

FOR AERONAUTICS.

75

PERMEABILITY: The measure of the loss of gas by diffusion through the intact balIoon fabric.
PITOHOF A PBOPELLER:
(a) Pitch, efadive.— The distance an aircraft advances aIong its tlight path for one revolution of the propeller.
(b) Pitch, @meiricd— The distance an element of a propeller would advance in one revolution if it were turning in a solid nut-i. e., if it were moving along a heli~ of slope equal
to the angle between the chord of the element and a plane perpendicular to the propeller axis. The mean geometrical pitch of a propeller, which is a quantity commonly,
used in specifications, is the mean of the geometrical pitches of the several elements.
(c) Pitch, virtual.—The distance a propeller vvonId have to advance in one revolution in
order that there might be no thrust.
(d) Pitch qwd.—l’he product of the mean geometrical pitch by the number of revolutions
of the propelkr in unit time-i. e., the speed the aircraft would make if there were no
slip.
(~) Slip.—The difference between the effective pitch and the mean geometrical pitch.
Slip is usually expr-ed
as a percentage of the mean geometrical pitch.
PrrcH, &NGLE
OF: The angle between two planes, defied as follows: One plane imiudes the
lateral axis of the aircraft and the direction of the relative wind; the other plane includes
the lateral axis and the Iongituciinal axis. (In horizontal normal flight this angle of pitch
is, then, the angle between the longitudinal ati and the direction of the relative wind.)
PITOTTUEE: A tube with an end open square to the fluid stream, used as a detector of an impact
pressure. It is usually associated with a coaxial tube surrounding it, having perforations
normal to the axis for indicating static pressure; or there is such a tube placed near it and
paralleI to it, with a closed conical end and having perforations in its side. The velocity of
the fluid can be determined from the difference between the impact pressure and the static
pressure, as read by a suitable gauge. This instrument is often used to determine the
velocity of an aircraft through the air.
PLANE: One of the main supporting surfaces of an airplane or of a wing. (’I’hus the upper
or lower plane of an airplane or the upper right plane or lower right plane of the right wing.)
Po,N’rooNs: .SeeIZioat.
PEESSURE
Nozzm: The apparatus which, in combination with a gauge, is naed to measure
speed through the air.
PusImB: See Airplane.
PYLON: A mast or pillar serving as a marker of a mu-se.
R.mE OF A I?HOPEU.ER: See fip stream.
RATE OF CLIMB:The vertical component of the flight speed of an aircraft--i. e., its vertical
veIocity with reference to the air.
Rm&m
wrND: The motion of the air with reference to a moving body. Its direction and
velocity, therefore, are found by addirg two vectors, one being the velocity of the air with
reference to the earth, the other being equal and opposite to the velocity of the body with
reference to the eru%h,
RI~~-HAND Exam: An engine designed to drive a righLhand tractor screw.
RmmrrNc+~OMJENT: moment which tends to rwtore an aircraft to its previous attitude after
A
any rotational disturbance.
RrP corm: The rope running from the rip panel of a balloon to the basket, the pulling of which
causes immediate deflation.
RIP PANEL:A strip in the upper part of a baIloon which isj.torq qfl w~q i~gdiate -. deflation
— . ..-=
=-,?—
is desired.

ROLL, A: An aerial maneuver in which a complete revoh$ion %6ut ~e longitudinal axis is,‘-.~i
JTr--.:
made, the direction of flight being maintained.
RUDDER:A hinged or pivoted surface, usually more or less flat ~~. ~~~,ilip?d,l
Wed. for the
purpose of controlling the attitude of an aircraft about ita no
“-l. e., for tinkdling
%?lJfl%fil Jr: ~~
;,:::.-.J
ita lateral movement.
l%rZunced.-A rudder having part of ita surface in front of ifa pivot~~:t~~ ~. ,:,
r;

-.—

—..
.. —
— —.

.-.—
_

—
- .-

—.

-.

--- —
.-.——
...
.

..-.
.
.-.
-.. .
.. —- —.. _

RUDDEEBML:The foot bar by means of which the rudder is operated.
SEAPIANE:.4 particular form of airplane in which the landing gear is suited to operation from
the water.
(a) Boat mzptane (or flying &mt).—A form of seaplane having for its central portion a boat
which provides flotation. It is often provided with auxiIiary flode or pontoons.
(6) Float wzplane .—A form of seaplane in which the landing gear consists of one or more
floats or pontoom.
SERPENT: A short, heavy guide rope.
SIDE SLIPPING: Sliding downward and inward when making a turn; due to excessive banking.
It is the opposite of skidding.
SKrDDrNc+:
Sliding sidewise away from the center of the turn in flight. It is usually caused by
insufficient banking in a turn and is the opposite of side slipping.
%cms: Long wooden or metal runners designed to prevent nosing of a land machine when
landing or to prevent dropping into holes or ditches in rough ground. GeneraIly designed
to function should the landing gear collapse or fail to act.
STREAM (or propeller race): The stream of air dkiven aft by the propeller and with a veloc.SJ.IP
ity relative to the airplane greater than that of the surrounding body of still air.
SoA.Rm~ kiAOHTNE: Glider.
See
SPAN(or qnwui): The maximum distance laterally from tip to tip of an airp[a.neor the lateral
dimension of an aerofoil.
SPEED: Air.—The speed of an aircraft relative to the air.
Ground.-The horizontal component of the velocity of an aircraft relative h the earth.
SrzN: An aerial maneuver consisting of a combination of roll and yaw, with the longitudinal
axis of the airplane inclined steeply downward. The machine descends in a helix of large
pitch and very smalI radius, the upper side of the machine being on the inside of the helix,
and the angle of attack being maintained at a large value.
STABILITY: A body in any attitude has stability about an axis if, after a alight displacement
about that axis, it tends to regain its initial attitude.
Directiond.-%ability
with reference to the normal axis.
Dynamicd.-’I!he quality of an aircraft in flight which causes it to return to a condition
of equilibrium after ite attitude has been changed by meeting some disturbance--e. g.,
a gust. ‘I!hia return to equilibrium is due to two factors: First, the inherent righting
momenta of tho structu.m; second, the damping of the osciiktiona by the tail, etc.
inherent.+3tability of an aircraft due to the disposition and arrangement of its fied parts,
i. e., that pioperty which causes it to return to its normal attitude of ilight without the use of
the controls.
LatazZ.~tability
with reference to displacmnents involving rolling or yawing, i. e., displacements in which the plane of symmetry of the airplane is rotatid.
Lomyitudinal,-stability with refmnce to displacements involving pitching, i. e., displa~
menta in which the plane of symmetry of the airplane is not rotated.
Statical.—In wind-tunnel experiment it is found that there is a definite angle of attack,
such that, for a greater angle or a less ono, the righting moments are in such a sense as
to tend to make the attitude return to this angle. This holds true for a certain range of
angles on each side of this definite angle; and the machine is said to possess 1
fstatical
stability” through this range,
A machine poseesses statical stability if, when ite attitude is disturbed, moments
tending to restore it ta this attitude are set up by the action of the air on the machine;
e, g,, if an aircraft, after an initial disturbance, oscillati with swings of constantly
increasing amplitude, it is statically stable but not dynamically stable.
STABKLIZEE: A fixed horizontal, or nearly horizontal, tail surface, used to steady the longitudinal
motion and to damp, oscillations in pitch.
iKeciianicd.-A mechanical device to steady the motion of an aircraft.
q

.

NOM13NOL4TURE FOB AEROI!TAUTIOS.

77

amount of advsnce of the entering edge of the upper plane of a biplane over that
of the lower, expressed as percentage of gap; it is considered positive w&.enthe upper surface
is forward and is measured from the entering edge of the upper plane along its ohord to the
point of intersection of this chord with a line drawn perpendicular to the chord of the lower
plane at its entering edge, all lines being drawn in a plane parallel to the plane of symmetry.
(h dinwtiom for rigging) .—The horizontal distance between the antaing edge of the upper
plane and that of the lower when the airpIane is in the standad position; i. e., when the
arbitrary line of reference in the airpkme is horizontal. (This line is usually the axis of
the propeller shaft.)
STALLINC+: term describing the cm+iition of an airplane which from any cause has lost the
A
relative speed necessary for contrd.
STATOSCOPE: instrument to detect the existenoe of a small rate of ascent or descent, princiAn
ptiy used in ballooning.
STAY: A wire, rope, or the like, used as a tie piece to hold parts together, or to contribute
stiffness. I?or example, the stays of the wing and body trussing.
STEP: A break in the form of the bottim of a float.
STBEAM-LINE aw: The condition of continuous flow of a fluid, as disthguished from eddying
m
flow.
STREM-LLNE
SH.AYE: shape intended to avoid eddying and to preserve stream-line flow.
A
%UT: A compression member of a truss frame. For instance, the vertical members of the
wing truss of a biphme.
SUSPENSIONMCO:The band around a balloon to which are attached the basket and the main
B
bridle suspensions.
SUSPENSION w:
The bar used for the concentration of basket suspension ropes in captive
balloons.
SWEW BACK: The horizontal angle between the lateral axis of an airpkme and the antering edge
of the main planes.
TAE The rear portion of an aircraft, to which are usually attached rudders, elevators+ stabilizers, and fins.
TAm CUPS:The steadying device attaohed at the rear of certain types of elonga%d captive
baUoons.
TANDEM:An airplane whose sets of planes are placed one in front of the other.
Tnmrcm: See Airpkme.
TBArL~G EDGE: The rearmost edge of an aerofoil or propelIer blade.
TMPLANE:A form of airphme whose main supporting surface is divided into three parta,
superimposed.
TRUSS: The framing by which the wing loads are transmitted to the body; comprises struts,
stays, tmd spare.
UNDEBCAIUNAQE: Landing gear.
See
VENTURI UBE: A short tube, flar@ at the front end, and constricted approximately midway
T
of its length, so that, when fluid flows through it, there will be a suction produwd in a sidetube opening into the constricted throat. This tube, when combined with a Pitot tube or
with one giving static p ressure, forms a pressure nozzle, which may be used as an instrument’
to determine the speed of an aircraft through the air.
WAIW: To ohange the form of the wing by twisting it.
WASHm: See Droop.
lT.AaHom: A permmmt warp of an aerofoil such tiat the =@e of attack d~rea= tiward tie
wing tips.
WEIC+HT,
aBoss: See Load, full.
WING: The aggregate sustaining structure on the right or left side of an airplane, comprising
“detachable wings” and “folding wings.”)
both plan= and trussing. C17hus,
WmG FLAP: See &rOn.
STAGGEE: The

——

.

.“
..- ---

-.

—

q

,
—

-.

._

78

ANNUAL
l131J?ORT
NATIONAL
ADVISORY OMMIT1’EEOEAERONAUTICS.
C
F

WXNQ LOAD~G:
WING MAW:
attached.

The weight

carried per unit area of supporting

The mast structure

WING BIB: A fore-and-aft

member

projecting

above

the wing,

of the wing structure

q

surfaoe.
to which

the top load wires

used to support

the covering

are

and to

give the wing section its form.
WING SPAR OR VVING BEAM: A transveme

member

of the wing structure.

YAW: Yawi~.-Angular
motion about the normal axis.
Angle of.—ile angle betwean the direction of the relative wind and the plane of symmetry
of an aircraft.
~ERO Lwr LINE: !l’he limiting position in an aerofoi] section of the he of action of the resdtant
air foroe when the position of the section is such that the lift is zero.

