REPORT

~0:

33.

SELF-LUMTNOUS MATERIALS.
By N. E. DOESEY.

A limited mimeographed edition of the following notes was issued August 10, 1918, as
Luminous Material Circulm No. RI&6 of the National Bureau of Standards. The cumbrous
title of that circukir-’’Notes
and Recommendations regarding Specifications for the IUuminating of ArticIee by Means of SeIf-Luminous Materials Containing Radioactive Excitanta” indicates its purpose and scope.
The circular was prepared with special reference to the ilhuniuation of military and of
nmd instruments. In its preparation the numerous quwtions propounded to the Bureau
during the preceding 12 months in regard to such illumination were kept constantly in mind,
the greater portion of ita contents bearing directly upon these questions.
1. Basis of qxx%feati&ns.-As the object of ilhnninating articles with self-luminous materials
is to secure a suftlcient brightn~ combined with a satisfactory life, it is most desirable that the
specifications be baaed upon the brightness at deIivery and upon the rate of decrease in the
brightness rathar than upon such a subskliary consideration as the amount of radioactive
mattiaJ contained in the preparation. T& becom~ at once evident when it is recognized
that the brightness of a given specimen of self-luminous material depends not only upon the
amount of the radioactive constituent, but also upon the age of the material and Upori the
propertiw of ita phosphorescent responsive base. It is emphasized by the fact that the brightness of the applied material variw greatly with the method of application.
Came of lumi7wseence.-Self4uminous radioactive materials
2. iYe~hnin.4u8 material-(a)
consist of mixturm of a reeponeive base, usually zinc sulphide, with smfl amounts of radioactive substances. Lmnimxmce
is caused and maintained by the bombardment of the
responsive base by the alpha radiations accompanying the disintegration of the radioactive
constituents of the material. Other things being the same, the br&htness of the m@erial
increas= as the intensity of the alpha radiation imreases. The actual brightness depends upon
the responsiveness of the base as weIl as upon the intensity of the bombardment.
(b) 8ecd.ar changesin alpha ~adiution.-!l%e decrease in alpha radiation due to radioactive
disintegration in six months is 0.02 per cent for radium, 2 per cent for radium-D, 6 per cent for
mesothorium-1, 16 per cent for radio”thorium, and 60 per cent for polonium. Th= values
aesume practicaI equilibrium between the elements named and their complete series of radioactive derivative.
This assumption is fulfilled for polotiurn (it has no such derivatives),
for radiothorium, for radium after a month if the preparation has the equilibrium amount of
rdium-D and of polonium, for radium-D from which no polonium hss been removed for at
kast four ye-,
and for mesothcrium from which no radiothorium has been removed for at least
15 or 20 years.
If radiothorium has been removed from the mesotihorium within the preceding 15 or 20
yeus, the secuk decrease in the alpha radiation WU be 1- than 6 per cent. To be exact,
after a complete remov$d of radiothorium the alpha radiation of a mesdhorium preparation
is zero; it at once begins to increase, and continues to grow for between four and five yeme; it
a89
.

.—

---- -——

_ _.,
, .—

.-

..
—-

340

ANNUAL

REPOBT

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOR

AERONAUTICS.

then decreasea at a rate that is at first very S1OVV, fhlly after 15 or 20 years becomes pracand
tically 6 percent in six months. From the third year to them iddle of the fdth year the intensi~
increases by a total of 7,4 per cent and by the seventh year it has fallen about 2 per cent
below what it was at the third year.
After a compIete removal of polonium, the alpha radiation of a radium-D preparation is
zero; it at once begins to increase, and continues to grow for a period of about two yews. It
then decreases at a rate that is at first slow, and finally, after the fourth year (counted from
the time the polonium was removed), becomes practically 2 per cent i.msii months. From the
eighteenth to the twenty-fourth month the intensity increases by a total of 2 per cent and
by the thirty-sixth month it has fallen to approximately what it was at the beginning of the
nineteenth month.
In the preparation of material containing radium there is a considerable escape of radium
emanation,i there is also a loss of radium emanation during the application of the matmial
to the article being illuminated. This reduces the intensity of the alpha radiation. As the
radium emanation again accumulates the intensity increasea; the recovery is half completed
in 3.85 days and is practically complete by the end of a month.
If the radium. salt when incorporated with the material contained no radium-D or
polonium its alpha radiation at the end of a month will be about 20 per cent less intense than
if it had contained the equilibrium amounts of these substances, and will slowly increase for
over a hundred years. The rate of growth, beghming at a very small value, increasm rapidly
for the first few months, then more slowly until at the end of two years the rate of growth will
be about 0.4 per cent in six months, and will then gradually decrease h-zero in about 115 years,
at which time the total alpha radiation will be about 16 per cent greater than it was at the end
of the first month.
If material containing radium, meaothorium, or radiothorium is not hermetically sealed,
any increase in temperature will cause some of the air contained in it b escape, carrying with
it a portion of the radium, or thorium, emanation. This WN reduce the intensity of the alpha
radiation; on keeping the temperature consttmt- there will be a recovery. For radium tlm
the recovery will proceed as just described, being half completed in 3.85 days. For the thorium
products the recovery is very rapid, being on-half completed in less than a minute. Not only
is the recovery of the alpha radiation of the thorium products very rapid, but, on account of
the extremely short life of thorium emanation, the initial reduction is less than for the radium
producte, most of the thorium emanation disintegrating before it can escape from the material.
A reduction of pressure produces an effect of the same kind m an devation of temperature.
Exclusive of such subsidiary @ecte as those of temperature and pressure, the secular
variation in the intensity of the alpha radiation of self-luminous matmials may be briefly
described as follows: If the radioactive constituent is mdhnn with ite equilibriti amounts
of radium-D and polonium, the intansity will increase for a month, rapidly at first then more
slowly; after a little over a month the intensity wiIl decrease very slowly, about 0.02 per cent
in six months, If initially there was no radium-D nor polonium, the intensity wiU continue
to increase after the first month; the rata of increase slowly decreasing, but for many ymrs
being about 0,4 per cent in six months. If the radioactive constituaut is radium-D, the intansitpill oontinua.llyincrease until about two years have elapsed since the removal of polonium,
then the intensity will decrease, the rata of decrease never exceeding about 2 per cmt in six
months and attaining this value only after four years have elapsed since the separation of the
polonium. If the radioactive constituent iE me.sothorium-1, the intensity will continually
increase until about 4.5 years have elapsed since the removal of the radiothorium, then the
intensity will decrease, the rate of decrease never exceeding 6 per cent in six months and attaining this value only after 15 or 20 years have eIapeed since the separation of the radio thorium.
If the radioactive constituent is either mdiothorium or polonium, the inhmsity till continually decrease, the rata being 16 and 60 per cent, respectively, in six months. AU these
values assume that the radioactive materials mentioned are not accompanied by their radioactive predecessors.
1R8dlnm
13manation,
dsoMMnWm,a radhctiw
in
tiom

Whklh

m

Wllittd

during

IEdkdiVO

dkillt+@hI1.

KMformal by the dMntn@fon

of mdfum.

It ahcudd not be mfustd

with tha radk

.

SEL&LUiWIXOUS

MATERuw.

,

841

(c)Secdar change8 in wpm”ve
he. —under the action of light, air, humidity, aIpha
ray bombardment, etc., changes take place in the responsive bsse. These changes are acoomptmied by a change, usually a decrease, in responsiveness. The most striking of these ohanges
is that due to the alpha bombardment. under continued alpha radiation the responsiveness
deoreases, very rapidly at fist, then more and more slowly as the responsiveness becomes less.
Other things being the same, the more intanse the radiation the more rapid the decrease in the
responsiveness. Whether the responsiveness will ultimately become zero is an open question.
The nature and extent of the changes just described are functions of the responsive base and
vary with the latter; the base generaIIy employed is zinc sulphidej and it is this that we have
in mind throughout these notes.
(d) flecular cikngea in hig?ttne88. —The secular variation in the brightmss of seMnninous
matarials is due i% the two causes just considered, viz, (1) the variation in the intensity of the
alpha radiation, and (2) the secularchanges in the responsive base. For praoticel purposes
the resultant effect may be regarded as the sum of the changes due to these two causes.
If the matbd contains radium, the initial increase in the intensity of the alpha radiation
more than offsets the effect of the decrease in the responsiveness. As a result, the brightness
increases rapidly for about three weeks, then deoreases for about two weeks at a rate much
greater than @at which later prevails.
If the radioactive constituent is one of the other substances mentioned, the brightness
shows no initial growth,l but decreases continually from the start; first rapidIy, then more
slowIy.
In general we may say that the brightness of a self-luminous material undergoes marked
ohsnges during the first four or five weeks after the radioactive constituent is incorporakd
in it. Mar this period, the brightness decresses at a more moderate rate. Of material cataining the ssme responsive base h brighter the mattitd the more quickly does ita brightn~
drop to 50 per cent of ita former value. For this reason it is dmirable h design the illuminated
portions in such a manner that a material of low brightness can be used.
No exact Qure can be given for the rat-e at which the brightnew of applied material may
be expected to decrease. Wide variations in the rate are found even among dials illuminated
at the seine time and with the same material. No explanation of this variability can now be
given.
Dials of 5 microlamberk ihminated with radium material have been observed to deorease
to 2.5 in six months; others have decressed to only 3 or 4. Similarly diaIs of 8 may decresse
t.030rto 6intJmsame time, and those of2tol.3ort.ol.9.
Dry material containing radium and sealed in glass tubes may be expected to decrease
approximately as shown in the following table:
Tuu

L-Decraee

in ihightne.w

of dry materigl

in 180 @n.

(e) Brigiitness reduced by adhesive.-The brightness of material that has been mixed with
an adhesive and painted upon an object is usually only 25 per cent, occasionally 40 per cent,
of that of the dry material. We have already seen that dry material decreases in brightness
at a lower rate than does painted material of the same brightness. It is, therefore, desirabla
that dry material be used wherever possible.
.—By the brightness of a surface is meant the luminous intensity per
3. Unit of Zmi@tne89
unit area of the surface as projected on a plane perpendicular to the line of sight, it be@ assumed
horn
IMesothorfum freed mdfothorfmn wVI ghe em fnltfal hexussn h Mghtness; the rata and duration of thfs Incmesa will depend
~Y
ut~ he tit ~ e@*
h
tie eewation of W mdiothminm. It fn mry fmwobeMe that such fresh mesothorimn will ever be oaed In
the pwparatfon of mmmemhl Itunhtom mateufd.

.—

.

__

___

—.

342

)

ANNUAL

REPORT

~ATIONAL

ADVISORY

CIOMMI!17EE

FOR

AER037AUTIOS.

=

that the linear dimensions of the portion of the surface considered is negligibly small as compared with the distance at which itis viewed. It is evident that the brightness as thus defined
is independent of the area of the luminous surface.
As in measuring a length we choose for our unit a length that is exactly defied (foot,
meter, etc.), so in measuring a brightness we choose as our unit the brightness of an exactly
defied bright surface.
For the measurement of the brightness of selHuminoua materials a suitable unit is the
brightness of a perfectly dif?using md completely reffect~g surfaco when illuminated by a
source of unit candlepower placed at a distance of 10 meters. This unit of brightness is called
a microi!umbt bmause it is the onwmillionth part of the lambert; the lattm is a well-known
and accepted unit of brightness, The microlambgrt is equal to 0.00093 ‘{ equivakmt footcandlos” and to 0.000 000 318 candles per square centimeter (3,18 millicandles per square
meter).
is
4. Total ligliL-It necessary to distinguish between the brightness of a huninous surface
and the totrd amount of light the eye receives from it. The former is determined by the luminous
material, while the latter depends also upon the argg -of theluminous surface. When the huninous area is small as compared witJ.@ distance from the eye it is the total light that givee the
impression of brilliance md determines the ease with whicldlw hunimme area can be men,
Position mark8.— Marks that have to be soon, but of which
5. Brighhass ofmarEng8.-(a)
the shapes do not have to be distinguished, require only a low brightness if they are to be viewed
against an extended black background. Lines 1 millimeter wide and 4 millimeters long upon a
black metal surface in moonlight are not readily man in all positions at a distance of 75 centimeters (3o inches) if they are no brighter than 2 microlamberts. If the surface and the
obeerver’e eyes are shaded from the moon then such lines are soon without difllculty,
(b) Legible character.—U the luminous markings (numeraIsj letters, etc.) are of euch a
character that their.shapes have to b.e distinguished, the brightmss must be greater than that
required for the mere seeing of position marks. Complex characters require a higher brightness
high with line width of 1 miUithan simpler ones of the smne sire. Numerals 8 -eters
meter can be readily read Uhe moonlight at a distance of 75 centimeters (30 inches) if they
have a brightmss of 6 microkunberts.
(c) Relution of brighhe88 to & .—There are at least four distinct phenomena that limit
the distance at which a hnninous character can be tid:
First. The resolving power of the eye. Unless the angle the character subtends at the
eye exceeds a certain value, the shape can not bo recognized, however bright the character may
be. This limiting angb variesgreatly from eye to eye.
Second. The sensitivity of the eye. This also varies over a wide range and depends upon
both the past and the present history of the eye. h eye that has recently beem exposed b
light is far 1SSS
sensitive than if it had been kept in total darlmess for some time; aIso, if the eye
is illuminated by an extraneous source of light ita sensitivity is diilerent from what it is when
the eye is illuminated by the luminous character alone.
Third. Contrast. It is evident that the character can not be distinguished if there is no
contrast between it and the region bounding it. The percentage contrast in brightness that
can be just distinguished increases as the bri@mse is reduced. For the range of brightnoas
covered by articles illuminated by self-huninous matarials this limiting contrast varies approximately from 6 to 20 per cent. That is, very faint markings will not be seen unless they are at
least 20 per cent brighter than the surrounding surface. Ih most practical cases the lines am
illuminated by the same light as the surface on which they are painted; their effective brightness
is therefore enhanced. This, however, may not offset the ill effect of the light from the main
surface of the article. For example, a white dial illuminated directly by the full moon might
have a brightness of 20 microlsmberts. If the marks upon it had a brightness of 1 microlambert and a coefficient of reflection as great as that of the dial their effective brightness would
be but 21 microlamberts. This is but 6 per cent greater thui the Imightnws of the main surface of the dial, and the marks would be ahuost if notantirely indistinguishable.

SEW-LUMINOUS

MATEIUM.

343

Fourth. A fourth limit is set by the total amount of light mtering the eye from the character. &wning that the conditions are such that this fourth %it is the only one operative,
then for-the same surface brightmsa a given character can be distinguished twice as far if all
its dimensions are doubled; if its size is kept the same its brightmas must be multiplied by 4
if it is to be distinguished at twice its former dietame. Exprmsed otherwise, this fourth limit
states that the distance at which a given character can be distinguished is proportional to its
linear dimensions multiplied by the square root of its brightrmss. As he determining factors
are the brightness and the angle which the object subtends at the eye, the effect of increased
size can be secured by the use of a magnifyng lens.
One result of this fourth Umitiug condition is that neighboring luminous marks may appear
to blur together although they are much farther apart than is necessmy to enable one to see
them as distinct under usual conditions of illumination. For ready seeing at low brightness
luminous characters should be not only large, but open. There should be a~few smalI inclosed
mdhuninated areas as possible; for example, unlem the 3, the top of the 6, and the bottum of
the 9 are welI opened, there is danger of mistaking these numerals for 8’s.
(d) Gwidm to required high.tnem.-The brightness needed in any particular case shouId be
determined by actual experiment. Objects of the required form should be illuminated to various
brightnesses and examined qnder conditions of illumination that areas nearly as may be identical with those met with in servb.
Frequedy a stencil illuminated from the rear serves
admirably. When the object is illuminated with luminous material it is de&able that it be
made too bright and then dimmed down by the use of absorbing screens.
In such tests at least two values should be determined: (1) The lowest usable brightness;
(z) The brightums that is considered the most desirab~e. If there is a maximum brightness
that must not be exceeded this should be determined also.
The various dues of the brightmesadetamnined by these tests should be measured in terms
of an established unit, preferably the miorolambert.
The following conclusions, drawn from observations made by various observers under a sky
lighted by a full moon, may serve as a rough guide to the order of brightm.ss that probably
will be required. These conclusions apply to huninous lines on a black surface. They are but
rough approximations, d&rent. observers and diflerent conditions of general illumination
leading to diilerent comiluaions.
Division marks of one microlambert are too faint W&S the lines are very broad, those
of 1.5 microhunbsrta am usable, but 2 microhwnberta or over is to be preferred. If the lines
are 4 millimeters 10WW
and 1 millimeter wide, and have a brighk
of only 2 microlamberta
there are some positions in which they can not be readily seen at 75 catimetin moonlight.
NumeraIs 7 milhmeters high with a line width of 0.6 millimeter and a bnghtiess of 2
microlamberts can be read at a distawe of 30 centimeters (1 foot), but a brightness of 4 is
much better. Numerals 8 milhneters high with lines 1 millimeter wide are readily read at
75 centimeters (2+ feet) if they have a brightness of 5.
A circular strip 6.4 millimeters (~ inch) wide with outside diameter of 38 millimeters (1}
inches) is tilble at 9 meters (3o feet) if it has a brightiws of 6 microlamberts.
6. i%rnmuy.-lh
des&uing an article to be ilhnninahd, and in drawing spec.Mcations
for the illumination of it, the following poiRts should be considered:
(a) The characters should be large sad of simple design; usually they should be as large
as is consistent with the other I’eqnirermmti. Published reaulta indicate that when the ratio
of height of character to width of line is equel to 8 the best condition for legibility of such
letters ss N, S, E, and W has been secured.
(b) The spacing should be open. It is unddrable to reduce the dwtance between adjacent
huninous areas t6 1sss than 2 millimeters.
(c) The number of luminous markings should be reduced to a minimum.
(d) Pointers can advantageously be huninous from pivot to tip, but the tail should never
be illuminated. In many cases it is unnecessary for the luminous material to cover the entire
width~of the pointer.

.- --

&NNI%U.i
REPORT

944

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

00 WJXI?IWE

FOR

AERONAUTIC%

(e) .Unilluminated areas.that can be seen by the observer should be dull black.
(f) The brightness required should be determhed h. each case by an actual trial under
service. conditions of illumination and distance.
(g) The nature of the radioacti~e constituent of. the material will be de-.ed
by the
life requirements. If the life is to exceed six months, polonium unaccompanied by an equilibrium amount of radium-D should not .be used; and only under special conditions would
radiothorium be sitidactory; there would be but little choice between mesothorium-1 and
radium. If a short life of high brightness is desired, radiothoriurn, radium-D, and, in certain
cases, polonium, might give satisfaction; the life of very bright materiaI is in any case short
on account of the rapid loss in the responsiveness crfthe base.
(h) The secular decrease in the brightness of the material is very perceptible and must
be allowed for.
(i) The specifications should be so worded as t.o—
Prevent the use of undesirable radioactive. .ccmstituent.a. (See caution, p. 9.)
Specify the brightness of each part on delivery.
Specify that the brightness shall not decrease by more than a specified amount in a
specified. time. When dtite
limits of this kind can not be given, it should be
specfied that the brightn= shall require the longeet period practicable to decrease
to one-half its value on delivery.
Require that the material, especially if it contains radium, shall have been completdy prepared for several, preferably at least five, wealm before dalivery.
Provide for inspection an delivery, and for the selection by the inspector of spccimene for submittal to a life test.~
Require that the manner of application shall be suitable for the purpose.
State clearly the size, design, and position of each luminous mark.
Require the bidder and the contractor b stata b every case (1) the trade name and
grade of the material used; (2) the manufacturer of the matarial, and (3) the firm that
applies. the material.
7, Appendix.— (a) Caution.-Since the only function of the radioactive constituent of a
self-luminous material is to furnish an alpha ray bombardment for exciting the huninosceuce
of the responsive base, the effective measure of any constituent is not its weight but the intensity of the alpha radiation furnished by it. The intensity of the radiation from a short-lived
material is much greater than that from. an equsJ weight of a long-lived one. Illustrations
of this difference are given in the following table.
TABLE2.-Conapm+on oj the rah of ernieeian of alpha portkks.
[-w-&aim

radic-elemento u compsrerf with thair rati of emhatonfrom redium with M derivatives to and Inchdxq mdlum-c.]
Radio+.lement.

ltwdl~mm.otiofi.l.
titidwIWm
ltruemiutgramrad io-thorium
tithtitilvw
i trw millkpam poloninm (mdiun-lr) .......

Rfuffuro.

mwqramk

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.......................................................................................

-1,030
-I,lul

I

.

On account of this fact it-is most necessary to exercise extreme. care in the wording of
those portions of specifications and other discussions of luninoua materkds that deal with
the relative amounts of different radio-ekunenk contained in the material.
For example, the statement that “ 75 per cent of the radioactive constituents shall be
radium” is most ambiguous. In order to be of value in determining the properties of the
hnninous material the restriction should state explicitly that” 75 per cent of the alpha radiation
of the material shall be due to radium. ” Otherwise the restriction ma~ be interpreted as
meaning 75 per cent by weight. It is evident from the table that the presence of 25 per cent
by weight of polonium will give the material practically the same charactmistics as if activated
entirely by polonium.
Bur@u of Stmdsrda fs prepared to oonduot suoh Ilfe teats for the Grmrmrrrent, sndj on requwt, ~
! The
tests for the pubk

wmsfdm the undertakfrq of stmlIar

.

.

SJHYF-LUMINOUS

MATEUMA.

345

(b) Alphu radiution-Thne cwwtx.-Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4 show the secular variation in
the alpha radiation from materisl containing mesothoriun-1, radium-D, radiothorium, and
polonium, respectively.
The constants used in the computation of these curves are those given by Rutherford
in his ‘f Radioactive substances and their radiations.’ J
(c) Brightness-fime curve8.-Figures 5, 6, and 7 represent the variation in brightness
of four tubes of dry radium luminous materiaI studied at this Bureau. The four specimens
me believed to differ only in the amount of radium contained in them. The radium was added
to the zinc sulphide only a few days before the first observation, somewhere about the thirtieth
day from the origin of time arbitrarily chosen for these curves. Throughout the period covered
by these curves the tubes were protected from external light.
of ah”cles by meam?of selfhmhws
muti(d.) Form of 8peci@ztion8 fw th ikninatbn

—

riala cantuini~ radioactive excituni8.
GENERAL.

1. These specifications cover the requirements of -----for the illumination of -----2. When luminous -----ordered, the luminous material used must cunform to these
specifications. The markings must conform ta those indicated in the specifications for the
individual articles.
3. The manufacturer of the luminous mticdes shall furnish the following with his proposal:
(a) The trade name and grade, and the mune of the manufacturer of the luminous materiai
he intends h use.
(lJ) The name of the company that will apply the material.
(c) Samples of the proposed illumination. These sampks will be subjected ta examination and tests, and may not be returned to the bidder.
4. The manufacturer shall notify ..---of my change in the luminous material from
that accepted.
5. Whenever the word “brightness” occurs in these specifications it shall be tmderstood
ta mean the surface brightness of the part after it has been cxmtinuously protected from alI
external Iight for the immediately preceding period of eight hours.
MATERIAL. ,

6. The luminous materiaI shall consist of a suitable compound containing radium or
mesothorium-1, or both. No radioactive materkd of a shorter average life than mesthorium-1
(7.9 yearn) shall be prwmt unless accompanied by at Ieast the equilibrium amount of its immediate predecessor in the same radioactive series. (See p. 9.)
7. No radioactive substance shall have been added to the luminous material during the
five weeks preceding the inspection for the acceptance of the illuminated artichs.
8. TIM quality and the composition of the luminous material shall be such that during the
months following the acceptance inspection the br&htness of the illuminated article
-----shalI not decrease under service conditions by more than ------ per cent of its value at the time
of such inspection. (Or, the quality and the composition of the luminous material shall be such
as under service conditions to require the longeat period practicable for the brightness of the
ilhminated reticle to decrease to om+half its value at the time of the acceptance inspection.)

—-

BRIGHTNESS.
9. At & time of the inspection for acceptance the brightness of each part shall be as
stated in the following schedule:
schedulef in’ightnm.
o
and
Artfd13 plllt.
.
. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

........

............ ....

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

+--

‘“””--

‘“

""-""" ----""---.
"--"
--"""---"--------"------"----"-----------------+"-"-------------------i--------------"-----------------------"--"""""-""

...................... . .. ...... ........... .... ......................... ..... ................... ....................... .... ......... .. .............

,—

FOB AERONAUTICS.
ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISOBY CIQIKMXl?ZEE

346

APPLI(IATION.

10. The luminous material shall be applied in such a manner that it will not bmome
loosened or detached under normal service condit!o~.
11. Upon huninous parts that are to be immersed in a liquid, the kninous matmial
must be so applied that it will not deteriorate from exposure to the liquid.
12 The surfaces to be covered with the luminous materitil will preferably be recessed
or depressed, the material being plac~ in the cavities thus formed.
13. The surfaces to be covered with the hnninoue material will preferably be white, and
shall be so fhished as to prevent deleterious chemicaI action upon the luminous material.
14. Whenever practical, dry material (i. e., material unmixed with adhesive) will preferably be used, the material being kept in place by means of a transparent covering or container.
(The contract for the illumination of the arlicke
ing proviekms.)

will

include in dlkion

to the foregoing specifications the follow-

INSPECTION.

by an agent deaigM. AII luminous parts shall be subject to inspection at . ----------natedby ------------16. The inspection of the luminous parts will imdude workmanship, brightness, uniformity, and such other points as may be deemed desirable.
TESTING.
17. The inspector shall select for further tests such sampl= as may be deemed desirable,
This testing will cover the brightness, life, and durability of the illumination. Three samples
shall be sent to the place designated for such test, the expense of transportation being borne
by . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PENALTY.

18. (No recommendation.)

100

$0

60

40

20 -

0

2
3
4
6
5
,, . lyearS “
FIQUM
L--Curveahewfng eeonlar
the
rarhtion in the alpha radiation him ~~--l
Time

~

of tie smwth of radioWrfom.

‘rho timum

Menuity 0! the

7
materkl.

8

9

10

The time h eotmted from the

dphe rridietion erbitrarlh ahmense KC.
h

SEW-LUMINOUS

347

MATEBKAl&

.

a
RQmB Z~

&&ng the

LWUIIU
mrfatkm inthe
the growth of the pOIOdq

.—
4

‘6

5

alphamihtfon hmn radfom-D. TM timek countedfrom the k@mf.nc of
and tha Jn=Immn

omlfmita fsohosenal

loo.

—
100

so ,

60

40

q

5
w
~
%
$
0
Tfme . . . YuKs
Fmu-BS3,-CurW

2

3

*

SMwingthes
mIarvWkt Ionfntlleatpha

5

6“

Ladfatfonkoln xndlothodmn.

‘

ANNUAL

REPORT

N&HONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOR

.. .. .. .

AERONAUTIC%

.

,

Ud

PoLONIUM

40

\

\

1
---

---

d
‘rim

. ..

---

%00

DJY’

5(W

-.

-..
>m

*U9

la”
owl

-. /l
fUv

FIomm 4F-Curve sbowtng the swubm vartatfon fn the alphe rw%atfon fmm polontum.

I

1

\

/

CQ

ii

I
FrGUXE6.-CUI’VU ehowing the varfatton in the brightness of two tubes of dry radium Iumfnoue mstertal. ‘l’hematti
repr
by curve lE mnteinecl
resented by corve X3eontalmd 0.10 mg. of radium (eknwnt) por gram of mat- thateprewntcd
0.16
In& of radium per gram.

a

SELF-LUMINOUS

MATE~.

it

‘a

k

(0

.

nm’!ax 6.-Cncve showing the vacfation In the hrfghtn~

of a tuba of dry radluut Inmhons ~
terfalcontwllngoar ofradfnm~grrm
ng.

/v/’cro

z&d&#6

030 D.lg. ofmdfuInp3rgmIL

