flL£ ~ ; :

FIL E Copy

NO. I-W

TEC!1IJICAL

I:OT~S.

~\ERO:L\UTICS.

NATIONAL ADV1S0RY COr..1},CTTEE FOP.

CA
.

~

,\

o . 34

THE 300 H. P . BENZ AI RCRAFT

ENGJN~ .

By
Dr . A. Hel ler .

Tl"~1I~81~t6d
1I

Ze i t

sc~r ift

fron:

de s Ve re ine s Deut s c2:l.er

I2'l~enieure, n

By
P~riG

Offic~ , ~ . P . C . A .

'-

~

To be { {. ed to
.,
lite files ot the National
I

Ja:l:.lary , 192: .

AdvIsory Committee
tor Aeronautics '
"ashington, D. C.

NATIONA L ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTI CS.
T~CHNI8AL NOT~

~~ O.

-.

3 i..

THU_JO H: P. BENZ A IRCRA l" T E)JG INE .

By

Dr . A. Heller.

" Ze its ~hrif~

T:-anslc:.ted from
d.e s Vereines Det:tscher Ingenieure,,,-k
by
~a ri s

Office) N. A. C.A.

The follo wing des c ri p tion of the Benz la-cylinder engine
is a final example of the extensive de v elopme nt of ai:rcr 3.ft
i=;ngine cons"Gruct ion in tbe German Empil' e . During the l ast
fe. v years> t h e fi:m of BENZ has evcl v e d t hi s t ype of engine
Nhich vms first designed and conotruc"t ed tow6.rda : he er~d of
1 914 , but. ,'ihich .vas then teulporarily oet aside f or t ~1e time
being in favor of the s imple r six-in --line construction because
of the urge~t need for stand6.r dizing aircraft enbiL~s.
The l 3."G8 st 3)0 H.P. aircraft engine, wi th its 18 cylinders
p l a ced a t ~n aLg l e of 50 0 (F i g s. 1 to d) no~ only real!z es a
long-che rish e d conception wh ic h had bee n amply tested :rolr. a
constructional point of vie«, bu',j has a lso receiv ed 3'lCh r e finerue::n in de ta il due to the ext;ensi"lT e wo rl~i ng exper:.ence s of
the last few year s t ha~ it may be described as a perf dct ex ample of modern Gel'man aircre.ft engine constructior:.
Such
be ing t he case, a detailed de Ecript ion of 1jns d~ve lo pme nt of
the constructional }:-oints of the engine may be justifiab l e,
as g iven below.
The engi!:.e has 13 cyl inders of 135 mrr.. bore and 1 50 rom .
stroke . Eac h pai r of cylinders serv e s or-e of th a cra~k- p i~s
of the six-"G h ro" shaft and th e engine normally p;.'oduc3s 3 JJ
H.P. on 'che ground, at 1800 :c.p . ro . with tne carbu re~') r at f'J..ll
thr ottl e - vvh i ch i s only p ossibl e temporarily; and und.:; r th e
same conditions a ~ 8000 r.p.m ., the engine deve lop s 400 H. P .
The engine is a so- calleci "a!titude" eng ine, its decrease
of power ~ it h diminis~ing air d ensity be ing comp ~n sat e d by
over-dimensioning the cylinders and over-comp ressing up to a
c d rtain altitude . A normal p ropeller is dri ven by rr.eans of

* Anml.::il Volume 1930

I

p . 35 .

- 2 -

a rotary reduct ion geo.r lo·. m~ec. on the crank-case, t he gear
ratio 'oeing 29: 13. Its ·r.eigl·~ t ,vil:;hout ',' later, oil cI:3.rge, prope l::"e r boss, i g~i t i on !Ylc..bnc -:o and the engi!1e ex hau st m:::.ni f o~. .::.::: ::' 8 about 430 kg .,
;h ich wO·.lld. be a.bo·ut 1. 4 3 kg!HP as
r e:at::'78 to nor~al power on the ground.
T~e construct i on of th e cylinde rs (see Figs. ~ & 8) J
wni..ch are int e rchangeable and ar8 set comparatively de ep in
tne c ra:lkcase in order to dim:.niah the -.;v
idth of the engine is
es~)ec i a2.1y charac·terized by tr.e us e of inner cylinders made of
f.o~ged steel and screwed into a cast-iron cylinder he3.d (Figs .
7, 9 8:: 10). 'I'o prevent tr.e pos sibl e penetra-r.ion of cooling
wat e r into th e combustion -chamber at the screwed connection
of these two parts, the top rin of the steel cylincier liner is
jammed into a groove in the cylinder-he a d Nh~n scre~ed down,
the cylinder head beinES bent slightly outwards so th3.t the top
rim of the ste el tube is tU:::'::1ed up sufficiently for it to
press firmly against the side of the grocve . In screNing it
on, the cement filling of t he g roov e is squeezed out through
minute holes bored for the purpose. Th e bushings of the spark
plugs are 6cr e~ed ir.t o ~he up~er part of the steel sleeve , and
the n autogeneo~sly welded to ensure perfect tautness at those
pOi nt s. When th3 cylinde r has be'3!1 test ed at 30 times the
working internGl p~essure , it i s fitted wit~ a water-cooling
jac ket macie of sheet steel fro~ 1 to 2 mm . in thickness. This
coo11ng jacket is autogen6 0uo ly welded to tne steel sleeve a s
well as tc th3 cas~-iron cylincie r head. Experience shows that
there is no difficu2.ty i r.. welding shee t steel to cast iron.
J

in

BENZ & Co. have been c omparativ ely slo w
adopting the
use of steel cylinde rs in aircraft e ngine s a nd thereby ensuring
~ conside r able sav ~ ng in the w9 ight of the engj ne.
This may
b e traced to the ir desire tc avoid the decreased :reliability
en-ca il ed in wo rki ng w h ste el cyl~nd e r s when cast iron pisit
tons were used. Even when such pistons were plentiful::'y oil ed
and carefully mea sur ed for compression condit i ons, th ey showe d
a tende::1cy to caus e excessive frict ion; and t his was !'ea.lly
satisfactorily overcome only When each piston was separately
g round into its own special cylinder: This is a process
whi.ch would s e riou."ly hamper product ion and would r end'3r it almost impossibl e for a p iston to be changed in the course of
flying. When a luminum alloy pistons were in-:roduc ed, BENZ &
Co. immediat ely adopted the use of stee l cylinders.
The cylinQers are fixed on the spe cially adapteci rooflike milled t cp side of th e crankcase, each with 4 screws
placed as close as possible to th e axis of the cylinder. The
cylincier fl3.:'1ges, whic h are corupara-r.ively large in size~ are
O',illed as far a s possible I' i t h a vie Vi to eoonomiz ing in wei ght.
The cylinder heads are so closely jammed against the ends of

- 3 -

t:18

1Vate:!:'- jdci:\.et s::'ee've s that they can be :1lade su£'ficiantl y
tight o:r ,mea::1s of simple rubber rings covered ~;i th sheet-steel
washers ~SKf Schellen).
This tightness has "':Jeer:. !'.:1aintaiLed
even when the ruboer washers were of ra~her poor quality.

The cylinciers are served by a large in~ake valve and two
small exhaus"t valves (Figs ...... 1 & 12), ·oy whic h :Y,eans t!':l e re :'s
no dangAr of -ehs defoI'r:latiO!l of the exhcwust val7e at iligr~ temperatur e s.
A~l t!':le valves are operated by a camshaft located
between the two rows 0:: cylinders by means 0: pusn rods and
sir...gle and double rocker arms (Figs. 11 to 15) .
These rocker
arES ar e all '!!lcu~-ced on ball he3.rings .
The c2rrlshaft, ivith its
:3 bronze bear~ngs, ca:1 be drawn out with the 1aaring .vhen the
g'..lides of the push rods are removed and tihe scre .vs of the camshaft bearing loosened .
Double springs of very low' constructionb.J.. l1eight being
used fo!' th e iL ta~e -J"aj-'!es and. partly SULk in tne cylinder
heads, 't;he va_ve rocker of the intake va17e ca:1 b e brought obliquely under the cauble rocker of the exhaust valves and the
push roas are thereby kept at the requisite distance from one
aaother a.nd fron, the cylind.er head~ .
'.the ent ire cons(;:'Uct ion
of this mode of va~ve-operation, as compared with the ~ sua_
~ethod us ing s~ec~al casing Wi th enclosed callisha~t o n top , i E
marked by the rel~tively easy acces8ib i lity of the va~ves,
sprin~s and rockere, and the facil i ty ,;i th .,hieh the -:a ve
rocker bearings car. be lubricated . The ball-bea~ing of the
valve roc ke::.· s , fil3..ed lvith lubricant only when the eng~ne is
built or thoroughly overhauled, ~ctual~y needs ~o furtiher oiling . This tiype, "
"lhich tNas first intr oduced in the Imper ial
Prize EI!gine, i::1 2. 912, has so we3..l proved its wo:!""th -:;.hat the
use of ball oearings has been adopted for tbe va~ve rockers of
other engines with the camshaft located below.
In operating, attention must b e given tiC' the neces s ity
for leai,.Ting 2, plaT of about 0 . 4 ram . oet \/ee:-l the v s 17 3 stem and
~ne vah-e rocke r :;appet r;in when 'CDe engine is -;varm, so tilat
the valves may be thoroughly clo Dea by the time the e~gine is
cool . Special importance :nust also be attache:i to there b e ing
a similar amount of play for all the coll ec~ively-driven exhaust valves .
Each OJ: the va17e ~stems is con:1f\ct ed vi th the valve spri::1g
by a two part cone. This cone is located in 0::18 of 'Che grooves
of the valve ste!~, and 'is held fast by the pressure of the spri~g.

As thA valve ste~ heads ar e tempered, tne edges of t~e groove
must not be hard enough to cause scrat ching.
To pre':ent the
valve from falling f~eely into the cylindsy i~ case of breakage
of tile va17e sp~ingJ and )~hereby doing great damage, the corle is
held :..~ the spring co_lar by an exyamii.ng ring . A forme:::- method
of loca~ing the va17ee in an exte~si~n of the cylinder-head, in

- 4 ...

such a manner that they could not fall through , has been almost entirely abandoned on accoJnt of the difficulti es invOlved in the int e rior structure of the valve, and furthermo re,
as it ensures so littl e security from damage; the valve-collars
alone being often wrenched off, in which case, ~here is no
flay t a prevent fall ing.
The push rods are lengths of seam:ess steel piping with
rounded wooden pegs fastened with pins at both ~nds. The force
of the valve springs alone holds them between the valve tappets and the rocker, and they can therefore easily be taken
out if necessary.
The construction of the pistons (Figs. 16 to 18), w
hich
are made of the usual aluminum-capper-zinc a lloy cast in an
out e r chill-mold With an inner sand-core, is ch:uacterized by
tubular steel bushing, cast in the pistcn pir bosses . By means
of these bearings, it is ~lso possible to give considerable
length to the connecting rod bearing on the piston pin. The
piston pins are open at the ends and are secured laterally by
conical pegs w
hich enter the eyes from belo Y'l . The drag wej.ght
of the piston, as influenced by friction, can be compensa~ed
within a few grammes by an oil drip ring on the lower interior
rim of the piston. By this method, a piston of any series
may be built into the cylinder of an engine without d:i..st'.1rbing
the compensation of the whole. The pistons ar e fitted into th e
cyl inders by four small hi gh-rimmed cast -iron washers. For
aluminum pistons, much depends upon this jointing, as they require a cOr.Jparatively large amount of play when fitt;ed into
the cylinder, on account of the great expansion of the jointing due to heat .
The use of aluminum p istons is one of the progressive
steps of later years both from a thermo-technical as well as
a purely practical point of view, and they are now regarded as
a useful factor in the technics of power-propelle~d vehicles
of th3 future . 'r heir use is attend.ed by many pract ical advantages, espe c ially w~th regard t o econOTJY in the wear of the
cylinders, w
hich do not, even after many years' we ar, need to
be reground as at present. Sho·,J.ld the pistons b e come worn,
for instance, from insuffiCient oiling, not the cylinders but
the pistons only Would be affected, a?1Q the latter are far
more easily rene Ned . One of the stro~ ges t arguments against the
general use of eng ines with welded cyl inders is thus done away
.'Vi th.
Fro!!! a thermo-technical vie wpoint, t;he goed hee,t -cor:.ducting properties of aluminum are an advantage on account of the
corrlparatively low tempe ratures that al ways prevail on the upper
side of the piston Nall, and which can be detected by the absence
of fused oil residue. Thjs pT3v ents the s e izing of the piston
rings ?y fusion , w
hioh frequently cause s de rangement w
hen castlron pIstons are used. It has been repeatedly proved that the power of an engine can be rai sed 10 H. P. ~';i th a certain number of

revolutions and under other similar condit lons, by the installat ion of an alumi num pist on . lhean 3ffe cU.ve p i s ton pressur es
of 9atm. or e ve n ITo r e can a lso oe obt a in ed on high spee d eng).nes without any hardness or jolting in running, and all the s e
advantages are due to the good heat-conducting quality of th e
piston. The comparativ e coolne ss of the top side of the piston
preve nts the intake mixture from heating too rapidly, and
t he r eby improve s the cyl indel' char ge ) while the de gr ee of compression ratio that can be attained without risk of spontaneous combustion is greater, and the highest possible mean piston pr es sur e i s attain8d later 'N
ith aluminum pistons as compa red w
ith cast-iron. Taken as a whole, the saving in we i ght
by th e use of aluminum p istons app li e d to automobile engines
rathe r than aircr aft e ngines is no more than cast-iron as the
short pistons of the latter require the addition of ribs for
stiffening .
The structural formation of the master conne cting -rod
(Figs, 1 9 to 24), is r ema rkable for the successful location of
the jOint of the crankpin en d, which is as far as possible
from the immediat e influe nce of the f orc es acting from the piston, and also be caus e the screws s ecuring the crankpin end are
so precisely threade d a s to l es s en th e risk of their shearing.
Th is does not obviate the ne e d of using studs for the conne ction on one s ide, a lthough blank b olts that could be pushed
through ould be preferable. The bolt or pin connecting th e
seconaary-rod to the master-rod, is se cur ely he ld in a clampbearing. Bronze beari ngs are used between the secondary con nec ti ng- rod and th e bolt and th e usual b ronze cap wh it e metal
be aring on the crankpin for the master-rod. Th e stem s of the
conne cting-rods are round, and are bored from the piston end
in order to e nsure a tubu lar cross - sect j.on spe cially capable
of r es istance to bending and inside w
hich the oil channel leading
to the piston-pin can eas ily be located.
Th e engine fittings are arrange d on th e principl e that
the comparativ ely inaccessible end at the propeller should be
left as free as p ossibl e whe n the engin e is mounted on an airplane. On the other hand, the constructional length of the
engine should be curtailed as much as possible in order to avoid
any detrimental influence on the turning ability of the airplane. For the sane r eason, the carburetors, w
hich are joined
in coupl es each supplying 3 cylinders, and the magneto driven
by the camshaft are located in the space between the cylinde r
ro ws ) wh ile the spark-plugs, v th t he pumps for fuel, 0 il, and
vi
v
ater are placed at the rea r end of the engine wit h in reach
of t he p ilot's seat.
In lubric a ti ng the eng ine , the proces s of continually add ing mall quantiti es of fresh ojl t o the eve r-circulating oil
has been replac ed by simple rotary lubrication; th e piston
pumps formerly used a r e no w rep lac e d by ge ar-whee l pumps, which

- 6 are far more easily driven and are of simpler construction.
fo::mer pre jud.ice agRinst simp: e rotary hi tri~ c. t j 0·"1 he 3e ~.
on the more rapid v
iearing of "Ghe cranks h aft o ecl.r~ng s cnrou6h
coal and metal dust impurities in the oil, has been proved
to oe unjustj.fied in e~}:-eTiments made wjth power. impelled vehicles, while in the case of aircraft eLgL18 s, in particular,
the frequent rene ,val of the ent ire oil supply must be taken
into account . As applied to gear- heeJ. pumps, its relj.ab:ility I".as at first considered doubtful, as the gea:r:·-wheels must
be caulked at the sides in the case, and the ca1.l:i.king cannot
be replaced later. Experience has shoNn, hO \'lev~r, tbat the
gear-wheel pump supplies su:ficiently h:i.gh oil :t)Tess~re even
after long usage, and that it ne7er 10s6 s its ti g htness to such
an extent as to allow the oiJ. to flo w back into the crankcase
out of the oil reservoir through the pump-case when the engine
rerr.ains stationary for any l.ength of time, a nd by so doing to
involve difficulties at star~ing.
A safety device, s~ecially
constructed to remedy ~hat defect, consisting of a piston kept
open by the oil pl'essu:-e and 'Jei g hed do v by a spring, can
ID
therefore be dispensed with .
'l'~e

J

The triple gear-vvheel .~~mp 19cated at the lowest part of
the crankcase consists of three separate pumps (Fig. 25), one
of which (1) drives the oil through a nozzle collector into
the distribution piping, which is 1nstalled on the outside ':.If
the crankcase and is therefore easily acceasible for cleaning
purposes (Fig. 1). This method of installing the distribution
piping is now preferred to that of locating it in the crankcase and connecting it 17i th the bearings by transverse boring J
experience D.aving proved that cast aluminum has a strong tendency to become porous when the distribution pipe leads into
it, and that the boring in question soon loses its tightness.
From the prinCipal be a rings, the oil flows under pressure,
through tubes bore~ in the crankshaft, to the crank-pin end,
then through the tubular interior of the connecting-rod to the
piston-pin, which is 'lOllo'IV and thus distril>utes the excess
of oil on the inner surface of the cylinder swept by the piston.
The regularity of the lubrication functions is checked by a
i!lanometer at the d1stribution pip:.ng , the pressure of which
should never be 10 w
er than 0 . 5 at;r...
Two more oil pumps ( II and III) dl'8.woff the oil used in
the engine, to the front and rear ends of ~he crankcase) and
force it back into the oil-tank. This preveLts the oil from
col13cting at one end of the engine during t he climb or in the
course of a nose dive, and also from oj.ling the cylinder excessively.
A method pr09 0sed by BENZ & Co. for th e construction of
the oil tank is sho \~n in Figs. 26 and 27.
It s corrugated o1;.ter
,vall forms a part of the fuselage covering and is th3re fore
fI'

- 7 -

effectively cooled by the wind caused by flight. The oil first
enters at a by means of a pa=tition wall and rea~hes the
jacket b of the tank, where it is strongly cooled. If the
jacket is full, or coat ed with congealed oil through intense
cold, tne oil passes throu~h the proje cting ri~ c into the
1nterior of tl"le tank, from which it can £2.o'<\', in turn, through
the aperture d into the piping leading to the oil-pump.
The ta.nk must be provided with a ventilating orifice of about
5 cm. in width, so located that the oil cannot run out either
in climbing or in steep gliding flight.
A horizontal sheet-iron collective piping is attached to
each of the oil vapor exhaust pipes (Fig. 1) in order to carry
off the oil vapor from the crankcase. From them, the vapor
1S carried dOWl1l1'{erds and into the oi;Jen air by means of pipes
fitted with oil-receptacles, cut off obliquely at the open
ends ln such d. mann.el' that the sucking 3 ffect of the wind cre ated by flight can be utilized at will .
The fuel installation, ~ig . 88 ) , which has been constructed on lines conceived after mar..y years of practi.cal experience, consists of a pr incipal reservoir ~ with an auxiliary
reservoir b built beside it, a fuel-pump Q worked by the
engine, a hand-pump d \I'{ith a fuel scavenger §. and supercompression valve f in the pressure pipe of the pump; from
valve I, the feed-pipe equipped with a manometer g is conducted into the carburetor. The principal reservo ir is filled
with fuel from the auxiliary tank, and is likewise under
pressure of the outside air, so that in case of damage by gunfire or similar causa, it cannot discharge its contents too
quickly. If the contents of the principal tank have run out,
however, a safe landing may be effected by means of the contents of the auxiliary tank, as the fuel }:umps can be fed by
either tank. The allloun t supplied by the fuel pumps is considerably. greater than that requir ed t.y the engine. The surplus passes through supercompre ssion valve .f into a re -·
ce iver ', from vvhich it eithe r flows back into ~he auxiliary
tank or into the principal tank, according to the manner of
its adjustment. This disposal of the fuel l aaves each fuel
pump free to act independently of the other, the functioning
of the whole be ing thus assured even fihen the engine pump
may be out of order. The fuel is t herefore al \'Vays supplied
to the cart/uretor under constant super-compre.ssion, in which
respect it has .the advanta.ge over the ordinary device vvith
auxiliary tank, in whicn the fuel pressure at the carburetor
varies considerably in ac cordance vvi th the angle of the airplane and the inbuilding of the auxiliary tank.
The fuel pu~p (Fig. 29) consists of un ordinary pistonpump w
ith an al1.:mi num case a, bronze bearings band sli ':> ht1y ad~usted plston £, to which the fuel flow~ over a com-o
bined sieve - scaven~er and vvater separator d, the bottom of

- 8 -

which can be unscrewed , and an intake vent ilator e bo rne
down by its omll' ?Ye'tght. The pump is slowly driv ;:.. n by the con trol-'Rheels of the engine, Dy means of a transn,i ss ion screw.
In its original form, as us ed on the 220 HP aircraft engine,
it vas worked with glycerine as auxiliary fluid. Du ration
te sts soon prove, however, that there is perfect safety in
~orking ev en when the pis ton inducts th e fuel dir e ctly, though
t he interior of the piston must, in such cases , be filled
from time to time w
ith viscous oil.
Every time it descends, the p iston pump drives the suckedin quantity of fuel-mixture over the ventilator f, which is
sin.ilarly loaded by its own weight, i nt c. the so -call ed supercompression ventilator (se e Fig. 30) whi ch simultane ou slY compensates the pulsations of the iuel-pu~p, somenhat as an air
-cank . The cap -like body of the ve ntilator is inve rted over the
free end of t he exha.ust-pipe; the caulked r im of the ventilator being he ld dO>ff!l by a spring, the tension of wh ich can be
so regulated by rraan s of the scre w lid that the compression
of the fuel at the carburetor amounts to a bout 0 . 2 to 0.25 .
Any surpl us suppliea ~y t h3 fuel-pump over the amount requir ed
to main tain t ha t p ressure a nd supply th e cor:sumption in the
car ouretor flows down obliquely into tbe tar!k (se e Fig . 28)
surr ounding t he supe r-compres sion valv e, ~vhi ch is conduct ed
to the open air. Any ma rked variation in the fuel pressur e is
d sign t hat the air contai ned in the ~i r-t ank has escaped .
When workinG emp 'ty , i t is ne cessary only to open a n a i r-t ap in
the intake piping for a time to enab l e the air ·-tank tv be refilled wi t h ai r.
The carbur3tors (see Figs . 31 to 35) are w lded togethe r
e
in pairs and co vered wi th a vvate l'-j ac ke t; they ~clioin t he
super-compression val ve in the same dire ction as th~ fu el pip ·ing . . In t he float chaffiber a , t he f ue l is taken at band
scavenged t lrough a fine sieve Q and kept at a const an t
height in the usual manner. At this height, it also be com
es
stationary in t he p rincipal nozzle Q (se e Fig . 34) of the
carburetor, w
hich is connecte d .-vltll th e floa.t tany. by the cali bra ted bor ing e of the Dot tom se r e w.
In its st art ing p osi tion' the th rottl e valve f (see Fi~. 33) rel a ases OIly one
auxiliary b ur e, g , of the case; a fi.ne l y bored auxili:l..rj
nozzle h directly supplied w th fuel from the carbur e to~,
i
penetrat es into the b or e g and the strong as:piration t hu s engendered at the upper edge of the auxiliary nozzle ( whic h m
ay
ea sily be adjusted by changing the posi tion of the air v ~lv e)
enab les t he fuel to be we ll inducted and pulv e riz e d even wr. e n
thE; engine is 'H
orking s lovvly. As t he p res su r e on the uppe r
ed.ge of t.1e prinCipal nozzle Q.. augments, through t he wide ning of the throttle ope ning and increa sing engine _speed, the
f uel bec omes so nluch t he more h i ghly o.spi r a t ed and pulv e rized
in p roportion a nd auxil iary air ent er s t hr ough the a pe rt'.lr e
i
betwe en the pipe s k and 1. (F ig. 34), penetrates to the
~ rinci pa l nozzle t hrough fine borings
m and thereby promotes

the pu!vsrization of tne f~e:
becoming too rich in fuel.

a~d

prevents th e mixtur9 from

The ~~t~OQ 0: carbu~etor construction atove described is
based on tn e Fre!lch Clo,udel Carburetor ~odel and has !'.(;a.ny reco?rlmendations. It :i. s 8C1.3Y or access , and the nozzle can be
easily ad.justed 3.110. taken out from above; its !1lai.n ai!' stream
is perpeDdicul~r to the main nozzle, se th~t the fuel s trea~
branches ofi at right ttnglee and pulverizes \vsll. T~e fuel
supply .vhich collects E:..l; the bottom of the p!'incipal nozzle
when the engine works s lowly, also makes it possible fcr 1;he
~hrottle to open tc its full exter.t ~uddenly after a gliding
flight until it is quics near t~e ground 1 without there being
any risk of the engine: n IIjib-ingll before the fuel ha s time
to flow in -vhrough t he bottom openj.ng of the principai noz~le.
Another advantage lies i~ the fac ·c of there being no need
fo!' the usual auxiliar:,.- 2.ir apertu!'es, controlled by the throttle valve and liffiited. jy curves, as such apertures can never
be quite accarately adjusted, and each separate carburetor
must therefore be adapted to the engine for which it is intended.

The double spark 91ugs a.ttached to each cyl~nder for reasons of safety are indgpendently charged by two d' namos
(Robert BOSCH Co . , Ltd., Stu~tgart\ with 13 plates of 18 pole~.
The dynatT, os are ch'iven obl iquelY from the rear -end of the engi!le by means of ordinary spring coupling (see Fig. 3). They
are symms~rically ranged, and cons1;ructed for anti-olockwise
rotation and 8. ver:: simple method is obtained for adjusting
the sparking point by means of the rods.
The cooling Nater pump is installed at the end of the gear
wheel intended for ~he auxiliary corr~~nd at the back of the
engine, that is, at a spot ~vhere the e!l-..;ire contents of the
flater-jacket and 'pj.pes can be dischargeci. .'rhe shaft of the
pump is set in ball bearings at ~he up~er end supported by a
special block, .-wh i::'e th;:. lower end, "te:'mina"tir..g in a b!'onze
bearing, supports a fixed wheel secured by a pin. The pump
has an opening in 1;te :nidcile pipe, and two outlet pipes; it
cOllVeys the cooli:J.g wa-'\ ;er on e ac:l 3ide of the engine into a
main pipe, and this again conveys the p rincil-'al stream directly through the adjacen-4; cyl inder he a ds, so that th.e valve
heads are n:os-+; effectively cooled. A ;U"eaker 6.ux:'liary streaJL
of cooling ·1Na-Ger penetre::.tes the cyli!lde!' jacket from below
t ~'1Yougn a dis1;!'iou'.:; ion piping ~ anci a flow 0f w
ater is thus obtained in the directio!l of the cylinder heads.
An important part of tile engine is the redUCing gear, its
function being that of Yeeping tne number of revolutions of
t:J.e prOPeller ivi thin SUQh lim
its that the propeller efficiency
may ba good not ~ithstanding the much-desired increase in the
rr~~ber of revolutions 0: the engine.
The type in questio~ is

- 10 the outcome of years of experiment, unsuccessful until now for
the very reason thc...t Ivtth gear 'i Vheels} strong nearing of the
wheels could not be prevented in the course of long working,
even with larger wheel dimensions. As regards :,:.'eliability,
this type may be classed with the only really durable fo~ejgn
engine gear - that is, the Rolls Hoyce Co. 's gear _··1.t.ough it
has tne a~Tantage ove= the latter on account of lts ~rea~ simpl:i.ci ty. 'rile gear has beell sped,ally de s:i_ ~Eed to a~tain the
greatest .possible transIT.ission r2.t io for each rev olut iO:1 cf the
gear Nheels , at the same time without exceedL1g the reguJ.c...t ion
limjts for all-over dimensions and weight . T11e n'li.nl'er of revolutions of the propeller, estimated at about 900 r.p.rr. . for
geared aircraft engine s, is therefore augmentRd to 1J 8J 1'. p. m. ,
a speed which is also compatible with satlsfaatorf pJ'opeller
efficiency.
The outer part of the gear is connect ed. wH,h 'the n.e,nge
of the crankshaft by inside gear work, and the central wheel
is fixed.
It is therefore provided with a lever, Mad.e t.u revolve on the gear-box and adjustable to some extent, and the
unavoidable oscillations of the crankshaft are thus compensated.
The four star-wheel s, all set on one star, revolve bet ween
the se two rings of Wheel s and thus dr i ve the pr opeller, v;hich is
attached to the st ar. The crankshaft is cast in UDB 9.iece
wi th the s-:-.ar a'l111 runs on two strong balJ-bearings, the in~)er.
one l-:)c2..ted c.t the e:1C1. of the crankshaf-t, the oute:r O:le in the
gear-case. On Jlihis ahE,ft, the fixed central wbeel of the gear
rest8 nn two baV-bearings, and it is this artifice al::me w~l ich
eucl.bles the propeller to be d.riven by the star. Special care
had been bestoRed on the locatj.on and setting of the star-wheels,
JVhich attain an extremely hj,gh number of revolutions. Each of
them l'evo17es 0:..1 two Ci.0uble baD -·bearings, which are f:i.lled li/jth
balls and thus ;lOrk N:i.tbou;; cages, e:t·.pe:= ience havi_ng S'\:H)~ln that
ball-cage s are not capable of wi tb.S ·i~c..,l·.di..r.1g the stress brought
to bear upon them dUT 1?:1g fLight. The 'cea:;:-::i.ng8 are l·L1b:rj.uc.te d
frC'm the i::1terior by 05.1 fiC'wing from the c:~'ankEhaft ca"tty.
When mQunting, the staJ.·-wl1eols C2,n be Jaici. in a :re~ulaT Tine
al(mg the i. :c ~' e spe0t i vR no G
t;ued n::..sc S uy 'C1'.:':Diug the uo1J.~ G, which
are sJj.ght:L~r eo cent rio~.lly tl'.rneo.; by thi3 reed.ns, "Gl~e pe~~ iphera.l foxces are e~Tenly dist:r.jbu·ceC'. Olel? s8vE.r!il tee·L}"l. 7he
double beaTing bu:i.lt lnto 'Ghe fl'nnt end. 01 the "'xa:1knhaf'(i prev ent s longituC:ina}. dispj,acer.ler:.t of th 3 c·lar.,k.shaft 3.t th3 €;eax.
By me .-:>~nG of the P~'()j 8C'~ iDiS r"exaiSunal edge, tee geal' c..;Cl.n eas i1y
be taARn down.
In a ne wer type of the \'al-..re, the r e6tlla.t ing lever of the
fixed gear -iVhee 1 (wbich 1 e-\lf~? hap.g~ dovvp wa-r:uE:) , o.:o.d (me of the
ball ba~ri'l1g5 aTe disponsed wjth by t~e di~ert ~r~ns~e: of the
rot.atiuna,l mome'!lt of the fL·:ec. wheel co th-J fro ,].';': fldnge dncl to
the gee.:: box th'Cough a TO t~i:Y c·)upJ. j ng ,
The propeller is attached to an auxiliary flange by the usual hub and short bolt, and the flange is secured to the ball-end
of the rear shaft by a key.

3001-Benz/4

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig. 3.

