:.

TECHNICAL NOTES •.
}t\TIONAL ADVISORY COMMIT~ FOR AERONAUTICS.

No. 12.

~NT

EFFORTS AND EXPERIMENTS IN THE CONSTRUCTION

OF A TION ENGINE-2.
VIA
By

Schwager.

Tra.nslated from
Technische Bdrichta Vol. III - Sec. 5,
by

Paris Office,

.,

September.

-----.-.--------~----.--~------------~--~--------------------

3001-29

NATIONAL ADV150RY COWldITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 12 .
EECENT EFFORTS AND EXPERIMENTS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF AVIATIQN ENGINES,"

by
Schwager.
Translate~

from Technische iericbte, Vol. III, Sec. 5,
by

Paris Office, N.A.C.A.

When war broke out in 1914, the mean power o£ the aviation engiDes
a.t the disposal of the Gel'lllan Air Force \V9.S 200 to 120 H.P. on ~he
ground. The unit weight of these etlgitss. including tjhe we:t-er and oil
contained in them, wss trom 1.8 to 2. kg. per H.P. The fly;.ng efficiency
a.t tained with u1.1.c h power was suppo !3ed to be more tb.e.n sa.-iiJ.sl nctory, them
being still belia~ed to be absolute safety at an ~1titude Df 1200 to
1500 m. from ~ho ·i;s fired on the ground. At this period, se:dal combat
had not ye·:; been tho\'.ght of. Even competent authol'it:i.ee sC3l'cell' considered it erodible that the arming of aircraft would aver be a matter
of grave importance.
It soon became eTident, howeTer, that ever-increa~ing dema.nd~
would be made on tbe climbing powers of a.i rcr aft , in p!'oportion to the
p~ogr.ess achiuTed by the defensive artillery in the t9ch~ : cs ~f firing.
Not c.nly was i t requisite that climbing efficiency should reach the
highest possible point; climbing speed would also have to be rais$d
higher and higher in proportion. With this end in View, increa!!Jad. Emgina po'~r wa.s the first point taken into considera.tion. Engines with
150 and 160 H.P. on the gr.ound were conseq\tently obtaiod and there
are many Cases, even at the present time, in which such eI'.gilleS give
results that may be considered to be satisfactory.
Another difficulty then arose. The increasing numbar of the dutiel
devolving on the pilot led to a corresponding increase ;.n the weight
of the load carrie~ by the airplane. We need only mentiun, for instance,
armor consisting of ona or more machille-guns with atml1mition, bombs and
bomb-dr0llPing devices, photographic apparatus and ra.d.ic, according to
the functions of the ma.cbjpe in question; and it WB,S essential that good
climbing power and speed should be attained notwithetallding S'\lch e.dditional weight. This .led to too .
..Dasd for still highe!" engine p~_we_r_s=-,_ _
• Extract from a leeture given a.t the General Meeting of the Scientific
Associatien for the Technics of Aviation, at Bamburg, April 19, 1918.

If."

-~and angines with 180, .. 200, 220 and 260 H.P .. were produced. The unit
of weight of these engines was reduced, in the case of those with 100 and
120 H..P. , by 1.5 kg. to l.a kg. per H.P. Flyi ng efficiency did not,
however, keep pace with increas i ng .... engine powsX' to the extent generally

eLpected, in spite of the effort that was made to COnstr\lct ~pecial ~ir­
craft for each pa.!'ticular purpose an.d to equ.i.p such aircraft for tha.t
pill'pose alone, so as to reduce its weight and loa.d to the lowest pOSSible amount.
The ever-increasing demands created by aerial warfare causing the
need for a still htgher degree of flying efficiency, it became more and
more evident that the development of avia.t ion engines must be carr.ied
out along new., lines. and that increased efficiency alone would not
suffice to enS'In'e the desired end, the more . so because high-~owered. engines were incor.venient from a flying viewpqint, by reason of\their
heavy weight and great le!l..gth, which were unfavorable to the turning facility of aircra.:ft equipped w.ith such engines. Recent efforts in the
constr.uotion of aviation engines have been da"feloped alo:lg two different lines, which may be defined as follows: "Light-weight Construction n
and the nAdaptation of the Aviation Engine to the Requirements of its
Utilization. If

In the spr.ing and swmner of 1916, the flying efficiency- attained ,
through the reduction of the n~1mb&r of revolutions of the propeller used
on the engine from 1400 to about 900 r .p.m. t by the Mercedes 220 H.P #
engine was so good that it seemed desirable that all aviation engines
should be equippad with similar gear. This idea was justified , as propeller effi cisney can be co r~sidera.bly jmproved. by means of such reduction gear. It was most effective on the Mercedes 220 H.P. engine with
its 8 cylinders placed tandem-wise, but it gave rise to so much difficulty on 6-cylinder enginBs that the exps .... riments made on the latter,
with the gear, had to be given up for more urgent tests.
In spite of this, the Aviation Inspection ~Depa.rtment still pushed
the use of reduction gear in Aviation c.,;engine factoX'ies. As early as
autumn, 1916, the Department decided ~n the utilization of high piSton velocity and a high number of revo!~tions as the standard for geared
engines. Cons';;:ructional work was then zealously started. on all sides
and the a-cylinde~ Vee engine, with power from laO to 240 H.P., was Qrdered at several factories asthe best high-speed engine from the flying
standpoint. The uni t weight of this engine. including the water and oil
carried, was e8tablished at 1.25 to 1.35 kg. par H.P., - figures which
can. be ohta5.ned. without difficulty, as has been seen in the case of differe nt engines of the S8!lle oonstr.uctional type now ready for quantity
product ion.
o~

The enemy hacl also been pushing :. engine development along similar
lines, at a somewhat earlier period. In the winter of 1916-17, the
Fre-nch produced their first Vae high-speed engine at the Front, although i t had long been known among German aviation experts. The engina
in question is the a-cylinder Hispano-Suiza from which the French, according to accounts given by prisoners, expected marvelous achievements.
The early models of this engine were not yet supplied with gear. Their

H.P. wall 140, with 1400 r.p.m •• and their unit weight was 1.295 kg. per
H.P., including water aDd. oil. This engine gives an excellent impression
at the first gl8l;lC8, with regard to its constrwtion. It was also so
e7.ceptionally highly finisbed t.ba.t i t attracted a good -:'Ci9e.l of e.ttention
in German aeronautical circles, Many efforts were made to ensure the
furtber pro(.tuction of the engine without other alteration, but this was
not done on account of various weak points in its construction, an~ because German high-speed engines bad slre~ been in process of ccnstruction before the capture of the first of the French engiDas.
The examination of the above-menti.oned engine at the test-bench
(see Fig. l)gave re mat'kable results: Tv begin with, the eng iDa proved
to. be a distinctly high-speed type, its ~imum power being at about
2400 r.p.m. and consequently by no mea.tlS fully utilized With 1400 r.p.m.
and 140 H.P. as at the outset. 5eCO%)d.ly, however, too engine was found
to have considerable constr-u.ctive shortcomings.. Mention tlged only be
made, for instance, of the defective cooling ot tbe exhaust valve, which
was burnt up each time at the end. of 6 or 8 hours. The construction of
the ellgine was, nevertheless, most instl"UCtiv6 and. interesting to German
manufacturers, and it soon became accessible to them, as it was captured
in large zmmbers. The carburetor. which has already been described in
TECBNICAL REPORTS, (Vol. lIlt No.4, p.1l2) is particularly interesting.

The

pos~ibility

of constructing high-speed internal combU$tion en-

gines depeIlds more upon piston. velocity aDd. inertia stresses than UPOll1
the cross-section of the valve. The piston velocity can ea.sily be carried up to 10 and 15 m/sec., engiIl6s baving already been constructed
successfully with about 17 m/sec. !liston velocity, as, for instance, in
the case of the FrenCh Despujol racing boat engina. The possibIlity of

adopting the largest cross-sectional area of gas-passage is, on the other

band, limited. especiall¥ if great importance be attached to the advantageous form of the combustion on account of too high piston velocity, so
that the valve must be suspended at the tottom of the chamber. It is
desirable that mean gas velOCities of 40 to 60 m/sec. should be obtai.lled
in the fully opened valves. In such Cases, when the inlet pipes are
well made and the engiDe otherwise satisfa.ctorily constructed, a mean
effective pressure of 8 to 9.5 may easily be obtained. 'l'ba powel! curve
of a 6-cylinder ]anz aviation eDgine ~ be taken as an example (see Fig.2)
with ISS nominal H.P. With 1400 1" .p.m., tM.s engim produces 197.5 H.P.
no~ efficiency at a mean effective pressure of 8.4 and 1150 r.p.m.
with 8.75 as ~irwm value of the mean effective pressure.
A noticeable feature of this 8Ilgine is that its unit weight, ineludwater and. oil, is only about 1.36 kg/HoP. with perfect safety in
working, although it is not a so-called high-speed engine. In contrast
to the fil'st high-speed eZlemy engiIlB& produced at the hont, which had
no gear at all and a ~ratively 10wn~1er of revolutions. our 8cylinder high-speed Vee ellgines were all designed with gear from the beginning. Tests made with the first working models GOon sbowed that the
gear itself caused serious difficulties. It was therefore also decided in
France that the engine ebould be constr'\lCted without gear for the time
beirJgi and. forei(gl high-epeed engiIl6s still show tbe ClllBstion of gear to
be by DO means satisfactorily solved. a.s almost every facto17 licensed
to construct the Hi spano-Suiza bas different dimensions for the spw
wheel gear selected for their engines.
itlg

-4The fact of e. utilizable high-speed engim neea..,iXlg almost ODe ya~
aIld. a half for its developrJ.l6nt in 0\1r C·Ma is in DO respect o .u a to a.

lOIRer p:,:,odl.~tive capacity on the partli o£ C-al'm8I1 eng.i.1J9 menufactu:rers.
b1:t is the result of the f~ b.igr..sr stend.e.rd of worklng safety re..,..q.uired
by 'is. Not a. siDgle foreigll e:og:i.:ua bas so far been able to s ·tend the 60
hoU!'8' du,,:,a.tion test whil}h mu.st be passsd by eyery:· German fixed eXlgiIl8
before it is considered fit for service at the Front.

The first h.i.gb-apeed eogine iasv.ad in '!:uantity production in Germany waG the 13anz 195 H.P. 8-cylinder hiBb-speed Vee ellgi:oe with 125 mm.
bore, 140 mn .. stroke, and 1100 r . p.m. at the CTaJ:lkshs.ft, produciflg 225 1i.P.
With a view to
ble, the idea. of

b~inging i~

~·"d.tlCing

to

te~hnical

perfection as soon as possi-

1 t only when equipped w-ah

gGal"

haa been aban-

doned, as in the ca2e of the Hl~~no-Ruiza 'G~gioe, and it bas aecordi~ly
been moun·lied. without geax, in a limited IItllD.ber. on mDdel airplanes. It is
especially suitable for the ~ ose on a.ccount of its h5.gh POW6::r at 1400
;p
to 1500 r.p.m., as may be seen f'rQLl the power cu--:r-ve given in Fig. 3.
In the meantime I a rotary gfJa.x- w:i.th a eat;.s:t'actory safety factor
bas been s\1CceBsfl1.1~,Y' cons truct ed. for t b :i.s eDg:i.ne, Us maximmn e.fficiemcy
being increa.sed, a ·, the ea:ne time, to . 260 H.. Pr. :'be COllBt:'1..1.ctlon of
this gesr somewbat resombles that of tbe Rolls Royce, wh5.ch appeal's to be
the best of All the eIlemy goar. The Eil:i.gb,t ly e~ceRsi.e weight of the
structure m~ therefo~e be adopted without hesitation in consideration
of the si!D.pl:'..(;i ty of the Sp'llr wheel ge8.l!ing ..
W sr and oU iDc~,u1Gd, the er>.,gim lJ5ighe abQut :335 kg., which
&t
corresponds to 1.25 kg. :pel' II.Po .ll~bo1..1gh tb.1D is not less than the unit
weight of too ZOO H.P" B:i. spano Suiza eDg~ with gea::, the advantage is
still on the sica of the Lenz ongiue if we co~~e it to the total engir,e plant of a Spad air~lam wUn ZOO Ii.P. Hispano Suiza. er.gine, including fwl for I- J./~ b.o1.2Z's, and to the equh·a.lant er"g~tJa plant of a
fighting monopla;~9; and the c·oL119&.l'ison is even mo!'e favo!'ai::J.e to the l3enz
eogiLS in flights of lODger d~aticnt on account of its lo~ cons~ption
of fusl.
Another high-speed Gel'1lleJl eDgine of good power and 1'Jeight, and V?hich
p:r.oba"JJ,y alao been isemd in q')Q;ltity pr.od~.c·tio1.l by this time, is
xCRTI NG IDO- . f a~cyJ. inder High-epeed Vee eng~.n~. Its fOl'Dl is pe.:;:o'c;icuS
laxly plea.sing. With 2 lfJO :::.:pom. at the c;;-e.nkehatt, i~ prod·lJ!!ss 185
to 195 IL.P .. at the shaft of the ~p~1l' geru: an~. \re:tghs ab!)ut 252 kg.. with
water and oil, - that is, about 1.33 ke. per HoP.
he.~

A':;co!'d.ing to sta"'etnents m~de at the facto:1:'Y, the gear caused no special diffic1.'.l~1', being in that respect unlike other engiDe~ in which £ven
s:!IDJ?le spur gear could not be made to WOI'l:. perfectly al~h'mgh the dai-·· .
mands ma.d.e 'Upon the teeth were geoorally lass than in the case of foreign
engiXlBs.
The eontttructive methods of DUMI;ER and. ARGUS resemble that of
No reports can as yet be given of their results.

the

KaRT!NG engine.

The ADLER Works have selected a cylinder system differing from the o~­
In order

dinary met-hod, in the cQustruction gf their high-speed En:lgine.

~

5 -

to obtain a more compact style of construction, two crankshafts are 10oated in Olla gear box. They rotate in opposite directions., baing geared
together by toothed 19haels, and. they wOl'k on four oylinders each. Tbe
engina works remarkably emoothly and ite power output is 225 H.P. at
the propeller shaft with 2000 to 2100 r.p.m. a.t the crankshaft. The
prop~ller runs at 1050 to 1150 r.p.m.
The locatiDg of both crankshafts
in ODa ca.se entaila no actual increase in weight, as th& united weights
of the crankshafts is 01'll7 24 lrgs.. whereas the HlspaDO Suiza crankshaft
weighs 21 kg. The unit ~ight of this engim atDOvnta to about 1.24 kg.1
H.P. GeatiIlg difficulties were also origiDally found in this engine,
but the,. were dam away with by a speCial construction of tbe toothed
wbeels.
In addition to the above-lleIls d factories, tbe Om:RURSEL Works are
also constructing a hig~6peed engina designed by EDgineer Dr. Eecker.
Assistant Profe$sor at tbe Imperial Technical High Scbool in »arlin,
which shows soma novel details. It diffe~s from previo~ly known mod·
els. particularly with regard to the mechanism driving the c~baft;
too inauguration of such mechanism would bring the maximum power to the
region of 2eoO r.p.m. The unit weight of the ~lIgitLe.. is also a very
good feature. With 240 DOrmal R..P. t relatively equal to 2100 to 2200
r.p.m.. at the craDksb.aft, it weigbs 260 kg •• tbat is, only 1.08 .kg. par
H.P. This is not dw to the utUization of specially high-class mat~r ..
ial, but is attained solely by tbe dispOSition. a.nd selection of dimensions of the eng11Je. b
total stress va.lue 1s ev&n lower than the usual values. He further details can be given, test reports not being
available.
In all
is attached
reason, the
with a view

these a-cylinder high-speed engines. too greatest imp.c rtance
to the reduction of their ccnatructioDal lellgth. ",or this
magestos are usually located in front, over the gearbox,
to utillziXlg that space, and economiziDg space in the rear.

Altho\1gh the 8-cylinder Vee engina may not be quite equal to the
6-cylincwr engins series in equilibrium, tbe latter serieo being perfect
in that respeet, the ill6l'tia forces, which ehiefly occur in a borizontal plans. caused no noticeable derangement with the dimensions selected.
The compensa.ting device which was proposed for the · ellgi:ce was theref~re dispensed with for weight-saving r&asons, without any detriment to
the smooth J'llmliDg of the engine.
For higher powers. the 12 or 10 cylillder Vee engine should certainly
be the given method of construction because of the free inertia forces of
the B-cylillder Vee type. Considering the great importance attached t~
facility in turniDg airplatles, it will be necessary that the engim
sbollld be still further shortened for combat otIS-seaters; for this reason,
the B-cylinder e:cgine has a successOl' in the fan engine, which 1s beillg
~erimentally constructed in a three-radii tY,PEI wi th 9 cylinders, by
OPEL of RUsselsheim. The next step should be fl'om the fan type · to the
star engine with a View to obtaining the perfect fiXed high-speed ellgine
for siIJgle-seater airplanes. This type also gives promise of future
developments in respect of higbsr 'powers. The star eIlgine also has til.& ·. ·

- 6 -

great. advantage •. now that ~e '. a.:~o"T of aircraft is eYer on ths incraase.
of belIlg armed vnth the lllst weigh~ possible.
The endee.~or to obtain a high nunber of revolutions in connection
with gearing bas also been extended to the rotarY' engina.
Atter ha..~lDg
already brought out eo 110 ILP. rotaryengina with transmission gear,
SIEMENS & IlAISKE latel1' issued a. 160 R.P. l1-ql1nder rotary engillo6.
The reduction of the number of revolutions in the propeller is attaiDSd
in the latter type by making the cra.nkshaf't and ~ylinda~ .hM:>ek work in
opposi~ dir0ctions.
They both revolve at 900 r.p.m. in oPPosite directions, so tha.t t~ cylinder block attains 1800 r.p.m. as compaJ'ed to the
crankshaft. This tn>e bas the advantage over earlier rotary engioos
not only on a.ccount of its low unit weight due to high liter power, but
also because the low number of revolutions of the cylinder star diminishes the unpleasant gyratory motion usually found in powerful rotary
engines, so that the effect isne lo~er disagreeable. The exceptionally
short climbing time attained b7 this engi~ (see Fig. 4) is due I10t only
to ' the transmission deVice, but also to . other q~ities which will be
described later on.
The effort made to obtain the higlle.st possible power wi. th the lowest cylinder capacity, that is, with the least possible weight. has also
led to the bestowal of more attentioD ~n the two-cycle stroke. In spite
of the evident advantages it offers, the development of the two-stroke
cycle system has been neglected in comparison to the 4-stroke cycle engiDe, chiefly because of the great supply of heat in the cylinder and
the high n~ber of revolutions to be considered • which caused serious
difficulties. The quantity of heat supplied to the cylinder wall and
the piston head at the time of combustion is surprisingly large. Calculated on the base of the area unit. i t is, for instance, ten times as
great as that of the fire-box of a locomotive. This explains the necessity for such a high degree of durability in the cylinder and piston
of ma~ types of engiDe. In the two-cycle engine. these difficulties are
even greater, twice as many combustions taking place with the same n"Umber of revolutions. so that twice the amount of calorific heat must be
applied to the same cylindrical dimensions per unit of surface. Prof.
JUNKERS has llCw developed the portions subjected to the influence of the
hot gases in such a way that those portions can be ef£ectively cooled.Another difficulty to be encountered is the scavenging of high-speed twocycle ,.engines. Mixed scavengi~ is not successful in most cases.
Pure air scavenging necessitates, on the other hand, the direct injection of the fuel into the cylinder. The constructive difficulties thereby entailed have been overcome by JUNKERS' high-pressure fuel pump.
which regulates the quantity of the miXture.
Prof. JUNKERS I a~ia.tion engine is constructed with pistons placed
in opposite directions, as in the case of the well-known JUNKERS oilengiJl8s. Two pistons mo....e in opposite directions in one cylinder, the
courbUstion chamber being enclosed in their inner dead center. Near the
outer dead center, the pistons control ports -in the cylinder wall, through
which fresh combustion air is let in and the cOnG'\1med gases exhausted.
Several cylinders of this kind. lie parallel to one another. All the pi.stons lying in the same direction dri'Ve a common crankshaft. The regular

,

.

- 7 -

working of the pistons and the accuracy of their intake and exhaust control is ensured by coupling the crankshafts by means of spur wheels. The
engine power is s~pl ie d through the projected sbaft of the middle spur
wheel, on which tbe propeller is generally fUed. This arrangement has
the addHioDal advantage of enabling the 'c est number of revolutions to be
given to the propeller shaft, by alteration of the transmission in the
spu"C' wbeel.a, indepeJldent of the nunber of revolutions Q.f. the engine.
The crank gear is disposed in two cases. which fill up tb& outer longitudinal side of the machine. The spur gear is entirely enclosed in a
sepa~ate case closely adjoining the ch8sging punp, which is projected to
form a gyratory l?~. ston !lump for the . a.dmission of fresh air. The pipes
for the inlet of scavenging and charging air and for the outlet of exhaust gases also extend over the cylinders, the first-named pipe being
constructed on the case of tbe chargiIlg-punp.
The pistons are equipped with a singular cooling device. The cavity
of the piston is partly filled witb heavy oil fluid which is not renewed
in working and is ~iolently dasbed baCkwards and forwards by the motion
, of the pieton. The fluid thereby absorbs tbe beat of the piston head
and discbarges it on the cylindrical portion of the piston, which conducts
it into the cooled cylinder jacket.
The efficacy of this piston cooling has been proved by measur"m~nts
taken wi th thermo-elemeIJ,t s. Fig. 5 shows how. the temperature of the
piston-bead gradually rises and attains the inertia condition after 19 min.
This cooling system held good at speedS amounting to ZOOO r.p.m. and
also during longer periods of working.
The JUNKERS engine has another peculiarity, namely, that all the
valves that Cause great difficulties in high-speed engines with increasing cylinder capacity and thereby limit the working of the cylinder to
Bome extent, are avoided ' by means of distribution through port-boles.
The valveless method of constrUQtion thereby makes it pOSSible to
construct reliable light engines with high cylin~er power.
The balancing of the masses attained by the disposal of. the p'. stons
,in such a manner that they work in opposite directions 1s of impo~tance
with regard to the utilization of tbe light-weight engine, and it can
easily be brougbt to perfection by the re~u1site disposition of the pistons. Combined with tba good condition$ under which the cylinder charge
1s renewed, it becomes pOSSible , witb such favorable balancing of the
masses. to obtain a high zromi)er of revolutions and to reduce tbe unit
weigbt still furthe~: ,in consequence. AS compared to other two-stroke
engines. the JUNKER has the advantage of being able to attain bigh mean
pressures and J in consequence. higb powers witb given dimensions. This
is seconded by the complete scavenging of tbe cylinders and the hi~h co~
preSsion of the charge. whiOh can, by reason of the absence of overheated portiOns of the combustion chamber, be admitted to the advance ignition without risk. Another favorable point is the slight loss of heat
due to the smallness of the cooling surface of the combustion chamber.

- e :!.: Sallmuth HmTH is now making tests with an engina tbat is quite
unique in its way. It is a twO-Q?,cle engina, which has no actual scavenge
or charging pump. The exhaust gases are drawn off through the hollow steel
ptopaller, its peripheral ~eed being utilieea for the production of a
vaCuum. This vacuum not only carries off the exhaust gases, but also
s~ultaneoUsly inducts the fresh charge into the cylinder. The obstacles to be over cane in the case of the engine consisted in the construCtion of a suitable steel propeller and in the transmission of the hot
.g ases f:rom the stationary cylinder to the rbtating sera.. Both points
have been cleverly disposed of by HIRTH. The cylinders, disposed in
sta,t" form, and the control are fundamentally 'similar to those of the
JUNKERS engine, excepting that the cylinders are curved around the combustion chamber in such a manner that the courses of the pistons are parallel. The mechanism is so di~osed that the pistons first expose the
e~baust orifices and then the intake orifices.
The cylinders being
charged only by the vacuum produced by the periphe~al ~eed of the pro- :
peller, it might be concl~e~ that there woul~ be ~ifflculty in starting
the engine. This is not the case, however. The screw is simply turne~,
at starting, in the direction contrary to the usual ona; a depression
is thereby produced, in the combustion chamber, which enables the comb:ustion mixture to enter through the inlet orifice thereby ez;:posed.
This engina, too, is supposed to run at high speed with gear, with 2400
r.p_m. at the crankshaft. The ~ight of a 300 to 400 H.P. eDgine should
amount to 0.75 to 0.8 kg/liP including the water and oil in the engine.
The method of abducting the exbaust ga.ses through the propeller may also
be applied to 4-cycle engines. A better degree of admiSSion can be obta.ined "by this means, and higher mean pressure and po?o-er are attainable
in consequence.
Although conside~able improvement in flying efficiency may safely
be expected, on account of the low unit weight of the above-named engines, the light-weight engine is not, in itself, a perfect aviation engtue, as the latter would be required to supply conSistently uniform
power ~ to those altitudes in which the greater part of its existence
is spent. In the case of the aviation enginas hitherto constructed,
power always decreases With altitude until, finally, no excess cltmbing
power is available for the airplane and the limit of its climbing altlt'Ude is thus reached.
The reason for such decrease of power lies, above all, in the decrease of atmospheric pressure with increased altitude. The rotary imp\'~se and the power depend upon the weight of air admitted. into the engine, and upon the efficien~y of the t~ansformation of fuel energy into
engine energy. If such efficiency were the same for all aviation altitudes, t~e engine power would actually depend ~on the useful load of the
engine and. would foJ.low the course of the atmospheric pressure~ With constant horizontal speed on the part of the airplane, the number of revolutions of the engl.ne would necessarily be the same ·at all altitudes.
As it is, the number of revolutions decreases more or less with increased
flying altitude. The efficiency of the transformation of the fuol energy
into engine power is thereby necessaril;y lowered. Until quite recently,
the decrease of power in its proportion to atmospheric pressure was conSidered to a sufficiently accurate baais. Recent tests have proved., hOwever, that the actual decrease of po",-et: :. is considerably greater •.

- 9 ...
Further details -were supplied by tests ma.da in the vacuun chamber
cf the ZEPPELIN aircraft works at Friedr1ehshafen, as already reported in
Technical Reports, Vol. III, No.1, p.l. These tests gave striking proof
of the fact that the po'fV6r of engines does not keep proportional pace
with the decrease of atmospheric pressure with increased altitude, and.
that fuel consumption inc;t:9e.sas with increa.sing al.ti.tuda. The increase
of fue~ conn~tion ~haref or a gives the course of the po~r c~a.
Eigh altitude tests made with a Daimler, a Maybach and a Benz engine - the results of which were published in Technical Reports, Vol. III,
No.1, p.1S - have shown how the increasing fuel percentage of the roixtnre affects the transformation of £\1.81 energy into engine pO?>e:r. They
also showed that the wor.king of the engine deteriorated with increasing
altiil.,.d.e. This leads to the conclusion that in developing altit1.\de en- ·
gines, the carburetor and, whenever possible, the efficiency of the transformation of energy should be 5.mproved, and that the air inlet should
always take placl3 at the same degree of pressure. The object of the improvement of the ca:rburetor would be to supply a mixture of air and fuel
that would remain constant under a:..l conditions. In order to be able to
do this, however, it would first of all be necessary to give some explanation of the manner in which the carburetor works. It may be assumed,
as a leading prinCiple, that air and fuel flow ~formly through nozzles
working without friction. This is the case with short nozzles as well
as with tapering nozzles, also with throttle valves with suffiCiently
large orifices. When the fluid passes through long na-.:-row grooves and
pipes, such conditions are no longer fulfilled. If special attention
were paid to this point in const~ucting carburetors, it might at any ra.te
be possible to ensure onJ.y a slight decrease in the number of revolutions of the engine at altitudes, such as is unavoidable on account of

tho li~l.t cp:?ra:~ing lend:
So far as the improvement in the transformation efficiency of fuel
energy into engine po~r is concerned, such efficiency J.argely depends
upon the thermal efficiency. 'rbe lattel.· rises with the comp:-ession, that is, with the proportional cylinder volume of the engine + the volume
of the compreSSion chamber, as compared to the volume of the compressi.on
chamber. The compreSSion ratio is, however, lDnited by the final temperature of compreSSion and the temperature of the cylinder, · if spontaneous
combustion is to be a.voided. For separate methods of engine construction, this limit depends upon the disposition of the cooling-water pipes
and more particularly still "Pon the cooling of the ignition sparks.
These considerations entail the r~s~ng of the ratio of compression
from normal 4.6 - 4.9 to 5.8 - 6.6, and to the introduction of the BOcalied over-compression engines. With such high-ratio of compreSSion,
spontaneous combustion occm-s even belo\\" ?OOO m. I so that the engines must
be throttled up to that altitude in order that they may not be worked
at m~imum power and that their temperature ~ be reduced.
In comparison with engines with normal. comp:c-ession, these engines
attained considerably better clDnbine time. The first of the type was
the Maybach 260 H.P. engioo. Its success led to the subsequant construction of other engines for over-compression. Conclusive tests wars made
on several Benz 200 H.P. engines with regard to the effect o£ various

"

- 10 -

,

ratios of compression (S96 Figs. 6 to 9). In Figs. 7 and 9, a comparison
is drawn between the registered increase of the mean pressure
.6.Pm
relative to the Itean pressure

PmS'

the ratio of compression being (s = 5

and the increase theotetically calculated by raising the ratio of compression by means of the formula:

k - 1

k - 1
~E:

1-

(

, 100

k-l
5

The result of this test is remarkable by reason of the fact that
the maximum mean pressure increases when the numbej:' of revolutions increases (see Fig. 8). tt may tberefore be concluded that increased
COMPP];SSION DATI() is particularly propitious in the Case of high-speed
engines. The increase in the rapidity of consumption is also dus to the
fact that tbe meaD effe ctive pressur.e actnaHy increases I w:·.th higher.
compression ratios, more than might be ~pec~ed from the theoretical
standpoint. In Fig. 10. the power. turning moments and fU13). cons'oro:p'liion
of the Benz 20:':> E.P .. engim, No. 32534, are shown with d:1.ffe.r ent compression ratios in terms of the numbe~ of revolutions. ~hey show that
the engina gives bad results with the max~nrl1Dl cOID;PresAion re.tio 6, such
res\ll ts being due to spontaneous comb\.\£ltion end al.t 'eao.y. ~ignalled by the
variable running of the engine and excessive fuel consumption.
Even the adoption of super-compression in connection with carburetors
constructed for high altitudes does not f.inally settle the Q.u.estion of
the adaptation of tbe e.viation eng:i.ne to its workivg l'ellui:!'ements. An
effort must '00 made to prevent any lOGS of power at aJ.1 i.:p to the customary f2ying alti~udas. T'aore a!;'e two waya iu which th5.s might be done,
aDd which amoun~ to praoUcally the same thing: bY' :lndllct:i.ng fresh air
in~o the engine at cons-:'nnt pressur.e, - tha.t ia, at ground level prefsure or at the pressure prevailing at the altitudes up to whi~h the power is
to remain invn~lable. The first metbod entails the conetrllct!on of a preliminar.y compressor in the fo:rtn of a tW.'bo or posi ti7e blow8:J:"; the second
entails the con:3tx-1.l.ct ion of an engir.e in which the cyUnd.cr dimensions
are propor.tionally too large for the gear, and wHh its power tmot·ii'.ed
do\m ..to its nO:.il~.na.l H.P. up to a certain altit\1de. This type of engine may
be oaUed "over-sized", or sa.id to have dimensions specially a.dapted to
high a1 ti tudes.
P:relim5.na.:-:y compressors for aviation enginas, in the form of tUl'bocorop:ressors. a.J~e either being constructed or being tested in differ-ent.
places. The furthest adVanced is that of BROWN, ' roVER~ & CO," who baye
constructed an installation for giant airplanes of 1000 to 1100 total H.P.,
at the request of the Board of Directors of the Air Service. The compressor
was driven by a special Mercedes 130 H.P. engine of such dimension~ that
the total power of the installation remains constant ~ to an altit~de of
about 5000 m. Complete tests were carried out with rega.:-d to the ~o'IllJ i!l.Bd
working of a Mercedes 260 H.P. aViation engine and. a prelimina..~y comp:1:'essor.
in the va.cmun chamber of the ZEPPELIN Airship Works at Friedrichshafen, and

- 11 it wa.s proved that the desired end could. be petlectly well a.ttai:cad.
FlyiDg tests made since that time ha.~e also proved the utility of the instalJ.at ion.

About the tlme that the Administra.tion of the Air Service ent.6 red
into negotiations with BOVER!, BROWN & CO. concerning preliminary compressors for aviation eDgines, SCHWAnE & CO., of Erfurth, bro~t out deSigns for a turbo-compressor to be directly coupled with a MBrced&s 260
BP engina, ancl, it bas since been tested at the test-bench. The blower is
worked from the rea.~ end of the crankshaft, by means of centrifugal
coupling, with 10000 to 11000 r.p.ro. Such high wheel velocity is requisite in order to obtain th~ b~.ghe6t possible peripheral speed and to red'llCe, in conseq1lence, the nUllbe:- of wheels; considering the slight quantity of air exhausted by the compressor, small w
heel diameters must be
selected to obtain wheels of the necessary practical size. The quantity
of air supplied by the compressor is such that the engiD9 power remains
constant until an altitude of 3500 to 4000 m. bas been attained. It waS
not considered advisable to proceed farther at the t~e, as it would have
necessitated the use of propellers with adjustable blades in o~der to ob~
tain the full benefit of the improvement, a.nd it was not yet known if they
could be successfully app).ied. In the case in question, propellers of
larger pitch ~~re to be used, running at low wheel velocity on the ground
but gaining such a high torque that the angine should be as fully charged
as at 1400 r.p.m. It is intended that the engina sh01ud be correspondingly
overloaded by the super-compressor. The wheel velocity should increase
with increased alt i t "
ude and should at "
tain 1500 to 1550 r.p.m. at the altitude at wbir.h the power remains constant. Tb& advisability of such an
overload depends entirely upon the strength and pressure of the surfaces
or upon the frictional energy of the gea~t by which the ~peratures of
combustion are not affected. The proof of the possibility of such overloading has been furnished by tests since carried out at different places.
The SCHWAnE blo'A"6r was installed on an AEG-G-airplane for testing in the
air. It is unfortulla'~e t.ba.t the machiw was lost in a flying accident
which was in no respect due to the location of the blower.
" With a view to avoiding oscillations that might arise at the rear
end of the crankshaft, in driving high-speed blowers, and which might
threaten to cause the utility of the whole installation to be doubted
undor certai!l com;i.tions t a blower of 6'l\"tally high power was simu.1taneously ordered at the StEMH:NS':'SCHUCKERT Works, to be dri\'en by the screw
end of the crankshaft. Tests made since that time with the SCHWAnE ulower
show that it is e"ll"idently possible to avoid the i.nfh16nce of oscilla;~ion
on the gear in us5.ng hand-coupling or coupling by cent:rifugal force, although the OSCillation itself will not be dona away with.
As in the case of fixed engines, tests are also made with turbo-com. .
pressors on rotar~ engines.

In order that the carburetor may be subjected to conditions s~ilar
to those of the sea level in the combimd wor-king of compressor and engi ne,
the float chamber must be placed wder blast pressure. When the gasCl.1 :i.ne
~s s~lied under pressure, the tank is subjected to the pressu~e of the
compressor as well a.s to the usual pressure of 0.25 to O~3. It is prefe~a­
ble I however, that the tanks should not be subjected to press-ure and. that
the ga.soline should be sUllplied by means of p-umps.

-lZFig. 11 shows tha power absorbed by the above-mentioned turbocompressor. In order to maintain constant engim power up to an altitudG of 6000 m., e.e% of the engim powsr was reCluired. Being rela.tiYely
small, that quantity can be taken from the ensine without any diff'icl.~~ty,
by means of' overloading9 Consideration must also be given to the fact
that an inC!"ease of powex> at 6000 m. is added to the eDgiDe llower on
the ground. because the engine only exhausts at an a.tmosphere of about
0.5, While it becomes charged at a pressure of 0.5, that iS t during the
tim$ that the suction stroke acts as a compression eDgine. If, therefore,
the pressu:ra in front of the cnrburetor is to ~ema.in constant until high
a.l.ti tudes are reached, by 1!I'elimina:ry cOIIRJression, the engina power
m'vst not merely rexr.a.in consta...'li. but must also increase. This has been
posHively proved by too results of tests carried out in the vacuUD
chamber at the ZEPPELIN Works at Friedrichshafen.
Over-sized etlginas prove to be more simply adjusted than those with
preliminary compressors. All complementary building parts a r e unnecessary with the exception of a regulating device to be installed in t'ront
of the car b'l\retor . TOOl'e can be no doubt but that this eogina will
come to the fore in the future, altho-ugb the pralimiDaX'Y compressor may
have th& preference for its comparatively high power at altitudes of 6000
and 7000 m. At the present early stage of developnent. it cannot yet be
dofinitely stated at what altitude the preliminary compressor baa the
advantage as ragards ~!ght. Up to 4000 m. t ' however J the over-sized
engina is certainly preferable in respect of weight and. constructor.
The circumference of the cylinde= stroke naturally increases with altitude in the Case of the over-sized engina, until the altitude is attained
at which tba power is to remain constant (see Fig. 12) .
In this figure, the necessary increase of volUIne of stroka is shown
without the possibillty of ~ additional super-compression being t aken
into c oneiderat ion. If super-coD'lpl"s ssion is etq>lo7ed a.t the same time.
the volUJ:La of the strokes is me.tol'ially diminished. .Eelow 4000 rn •• the
increase of weight thro~h increaeed straka volume, and the lengthening
of the total construction thereby necessitated, would appear to exceed
the weight of a preHminary compressor . 'l~ question cannot, however,
be determined by considering the weight alone. Fo~ the Dresent. greater
safety in worktog a~d more convenient inb\uldlng may ratner be expected
of the over- sized engine than of the engioo wi.th prel!ml.nary c ompressor,
as the latter requires to be driven with bighly sensitive spur gear with
high tooth velOCities .
The ~bach engine was not only the first super-compres s ed engine,
but also the first over- sized engine, although its ovel'-size was not so
highly developed as in more recent types. ~ne BAVARIAN ENGINE WORKS, Lt d.,
want a ste:9 further with their 185 H.P. !t resembles the Mercedes 160
H.P. engiIle in weight and. constructive parts, and its dimensions are such
that its power remains constant 'UP to almost 3000 m. The h i gh degree of
cOIITpression of this engine is remarkable. I t attains 6.7 without the
creation of aQY diffi culties. This fact is probabl y to be ascribed to
skillful inCI.uction of the cooling water into tbs cylinder-head. The
SEMENS and GoEBEL engines are examples of ov er-Sized rotary enginas. I t
wae Professor JUNKERS who first re Qogni~ed the advantages offered by
over-si.~ing and obtaill9d a patent for the same. *

* D.R.P.

No. 300007.

- 13

&.

Enginee With prel'mScary coaxpres8ors aDd. over-sised engines require
constant regulation of the pressure in £ro~t of the carburetor while
climbing . For et1g1~s with preliminary compressors, the inlet air ~r ," .-r:
in the Case of turbo-compressors, the air forced into the carburetor f
can be throttled down or allowed to escape through a pressure-valve. In
over-sized engines, the inlet piping must be equippad with a throttling
device which so regulates the pressure in front of the carburetor that it
alwa¥s corresponds to the pressure of the altitude at which the power
is to remain constant. It may be dom by hand, according to readings of
the altimeter, or it mq be regulated automatically. The latter method.
is preferable in so far that there is then 0.0 risk of d.amage to the engine,
at low altitudes, by inexpert handliDg.

These automatic regulators are constructed like barometric installat!ons. Figs. 13 and 14 show a utilizable plan of the lORENZ type ~ propeller, which consists of an unloaded double-seated valve. It is worked
by means of a caoutchouc membrane filled with air at the pre ssure prevaili.ng at the altitude i~ question. This membrana is placed in the spacs in
front of the carburetor, in which the pressure is to remain constant. As
equilibrium always prevails while the gear is in action, tllere is similar
pressure on both sides of the membrane, inside a.nd. outside, and consequently no stress is ~o"Ugbt to bear upon it.

In the same way that the float Case of the carburetor muBt be connected with the pressure chamber of the blower in the Case of engill6s
with preliminary compressors, so rauat the float case be connected with
the space in front of the carburetor when the engina 1s an over-sized one.
In the same ~r, over-sized engines may be overloaded at the start,
for a short time. If over-sized engines are also over-compressed, the
overload. can evidently only be carried to such a. point as is compa.tible
with safety from sponte.neous combustion.
The construction of variable pitCh propellers goes hand in hand with
the development of altitude engines. Here, too, satisfactory progress
has recently been made. A deSign has been furnished by Prof. REISSNER
in which the pitch is regulated by hand and which bas been shown to b~ .utiliza.ble when tested with overloading. The LORENZ PEOPELLER type gives an
automatic variable pitch propeller, in which a caoutchouc membrane inflated with air at 1 0 absolute temperature ca.uses the pitch variation
corresponding to the given altitude. This type of barometrical device
bas the advantage of enabling the requisite regulating pov.er to be easily
obtained by the ralative dimensions of the membrane. To keep this power
as low as possible, the axis of rotation is placed as nearly as possible
in the center of pressure •Flutta.rlr.e .of the Wades is prevented by an
oil cataract.
The firm of GARUDA bas also taken up the construction of variable
pitch propellers and has a most interesting improvement now in hand, the

pitch being so adjusted, by me~ of a. centrifugal force regulator and a
fore-coupled hydra.ulic Servo-engine, that the number of revolutions remains
constant. The constructive system 1s extremely clear and sumary. Such
variable pitch propellers should be an acquisition on normal engines, as
they render it possible to ,fly with a normal Il\Jmber of revolutions during
the climb and thus to utilize the engine power to its full ca.Facity. In

- 14 -

time of war, the speed of the airplane can be accelerated by compression
~ite of the constant m;mber of revolut tons, the propeller betng simply automa.tically
adjusted for larger pitch.

at the moment of danger just as well as at present, in

SUMMARY.
The development of a.viation eDglne construction during the War will
be fully d.eso:r:-i bed later on, the progressive adapta.tion of the aviation
ellgine to the deme.nda br.ought to bear upon it being espeCially pOinted.
out as the main object to be attained by suell development. The means
aVailable for that purpose wi2l be stated and the results so far obtained
will be disc~sed. In conclusion, reference will be made to the influence
of engine construction on the development of the propeller.

