.——
.

f

r“

NATIONAL ADVIS(XtYOCMB41TTEE
FOR AERONAUTICS.

.. .

flIXTHMEETING OF THE KEMBERq
of the
GERMAN SOIEMTIFIC A88WIATIOM FOR AERONAUTICS.
.

Taken from
‘Zeitsohrift f&r Flugteohnik und Motorl&t sohiffahrt.”
Vol. 11, XVO.20,Ootober 30, 1920.

April , 1921;

,

“

.1

‘+

la”

--

..

–-

.

--

-..

-—

.-

-—- .-

.

~
Illlllllllllll[flmllflllllllllllllll
;
~
31176

O_1439 9803

I

SIXTH MEETING OF THE MEMBERS
of the
..,,..,..,
GERMAN SCIE_liTIFIC”
ASS@”IATtON”FOR AERONAUTICS;
The Sixth Meeting of the members of the above-named Associatioa %ms held in Berlin, from the K$th to the 17th of Octoher, 1920.
During the scientific part of the proceedings, extremely
interesting lectures were given and were further explained by
the aid of photographs, films and pzactical representations.

,

Major v. TSCHUDI gave a ‘Report on the fulfillment of the
Peace Treaty in so far as German Aviation is concerned.~ Tine
brief allusion:..tnade variou. points may be summed up by the
to
statement that while the Treaty of Versailles would be executed
in the most loyal spirit by Germany, every effort would be made
to have it mitigated in the interests of the continued existence of German Aviation.
The communication most highly appreciated was to the effect that the main portion of the Inter-Allied Aircraft Control
Commission intended to leave Germany at no distant date. Major
v. TS(YHUDIadded that he hoped that that time would soon come,
as it would mark the re-commencement of aircraft industry.
Dr. A. WIGAND spoke on the subject of llAerolo~ical.
and
,.,
Aero-Electric Flights and their Si&nificance’
with’;re~ard Avto
iation.” He described the utilization of the airplane as a new
means of investigating serological and aero-electric conditions,

‘

1’
..

-“2-

and drew attention to the advantages that may be conferred on
aviation by such research work in the field of the air, through
scientific flights. The investigations hitherto made have ren,—.
,.
dered it pchssibleto study disturbances in serological r~easurements, and to avoid such disturbances on the airplane itself,
so that the meteorological conditions of free air can now be
. -..
faultlessly re~istered in the airplane , even at high altitudes.
It is thus possible to obtain the precise values of flight efficiency for airplanes and air8hips, and at the same time to
utiliz6 the qualities of the atmosphere to the utmost and best
extent. Aero-electric study flights were successfully oarried
out up to an aLtitude of 5.2 km. , with the main object of investigating the ionization of the atmosphere. The work is now
to be applied to the study of the other aero-electric elements.
The practical importance of the tests, as affecting the aviator,
consists chiefly in the possibility of analyzing risks now incurred through electricity, especially in the neighborhood of
thunderstorms, by airships and captiive
balloons;

$3s0 in solv-

ing questions of great importance concerning wireless telegraphy.
The lecturer concluded his interesting address with an appeal for the aid of all German authorities and manufacturers
desirous of promoting such work.
I’TheLatest Advance in,the Field of Wireless Telegraphy and
Tel.e~hony,Particularly inresnect of Overseas Communication,fl
was the subject taken up by Major SOLFF, Direotor of the Wire-

-3-”
less Telegraphy and Trans-Radio ConQanies.
.,,
----wjor SOL~ laid~Pecial sttess on the advantages gained
fox aviation by the latest achievements in that line. The final
‘impetus to the transition from ~’dampedoscillations by means of
oscillations
tuned quenched spark i~ansmitters” to !~non-damped
by arc-lamps > high frequency machines and cathode tubes~ was
given by the experiences of the tir. The principal advantages
a~e:1.

Diminution of mutual derangements at wireless stations.

2.

Increased sensibility and acuteness of pitch of the
receiver and its efficiency.

3. ‘ Increased efficiency of the transmitter, qf its wave
zone and of the radial efficiency of the antenna,
4.

Possibility of mechanical express transmission, qf automatic Duplex express reception and of wireless telephony.

All these are of particular benefit to aviation on account
of their facilitatin~ communication between aircraft duri~~
flight and between such aircraft and the ground. The earlier
antenna with long, hanging wires

is n~w xeplaced by framed an-

tenpa, which can alsg be utilized for sounaing, in c~nsequence
,
~ of “directing efficiency” (Richtwirkung) and is therefore helpful in navigating and adjusting the direction of aircraft.
The construction of the State Wireless System is of interest to
,.
-.. ,.
aviators with regard to weather and the signal service.
The speaker then alluded to the general importance of overcomunication, and gave an outline of the chief stations

.

.,

-4ah!ea,dyexisting and those in course of construction+::~, phowith
,.. .. .
..
togra.~hic
views. The ne~Ylyopened ““stationt Nauen, thus dea
scribed, gave a vivid impression of the overwhelming importance
of that station , as regards progress, and 9f the extension of its
soope due to the new high frequeuency machines.
Director DREXllER,
Engineer , then

lectured

on lrliODERN
FLIGHT

INSTRUMENTS FOR ‘TAKINGFLIGHT BEARINGS.lf ‘t
Navigation~’is e Ssentially a subject ~hich n.ustbe studied by the pilot before,
he begins to fly , and in 9rder to do this, he must first have a
thorough knowledge of the instruments used for deterrnining
the
direction of flight and bearings, and be able to use them skilfully. All that may be said concerning the navigation of a ship
aPPlies in a still more marked degree to aircraft, as air is usually a far less reliable element than water. In addition to
this, the pil@

rr,ustasie~ three dimensions in the air.
m

The

flight instruments now in current use do not fulfiil all our
needs.

The instruments of the future must be so constituted

that the gilot is able, by their adjustment, to find his bearings in absolute independence of x,eteorological
conditions, and
with equal facility when flyin~ in mist , in clguds or ‘when
the
ground is no longer visible.
the as~~ance

By this means alone can he attain

in p$ioting that must be demanded of him as the

pilot-of a transport airplane.
cautions have already been

In other countries, oertain pre-

taken as regards flight instruments.

In England, for instance, the instruments on every airplane must

j

-5-

b’ed!~eckedfor reliability by a controlling engineer in the serVice of the Government, before starting to.fly.
The speaker...
theclassedsed. instruments,@>ch
the

sh~ld be

produced at an early date under three main headings: instruments
for measuring the forces of the earth and of the air, and oziginal force. The most important conditions with regard to these
instruments are as follows: light weight, need for small space
only, and the easiest possible reading and manipulation, as far
as possible without any need for service or special maneuvers.
In constructing them, the high speed of the airplane, the considerable influence of flight and of centrifugal acceleration
and retardation, and the extremely short time at the disposal of
the pilot for adjustment must all be taken into consideration.
The pilot must be kept infOrmed, by means of these instruments,
of the position of his machine in space or in relation to the
earth, the direction of flight, flying speed and altitude of
flight. He must also be able to determine, by readings, the position of the three principal axes - that is, the longitudinal
axis, the transverse

axis, and the horizontal axis - in space.

A modern flight instrument was.then shown, and Director DREXLER
gave an explanation as to its utility and efficiency. Last of
all, the application of the gyroscope principle to flight instruments was described, and it was sta’ted.that
the flight .inin
struments of”the”future must’be constructed- ‘sucha manner as
to influence the controlling of the airplane directly.
.

I
&

—

—

—

-6Dipl. Engineer I’ZEXJ%RER gave some further informationon

the sailing-flight problem in his llReporton the Giidinz and
Sailing Flight Cofiroetition the Rhon.l~ This competition was
in
arran~ed “oythe Association of German Model-Flight and GlidingFlight Societies, from June 15, tq July 31, 1920, with a view
to throwing more light m

the much discussed question of sailing

flight with the en~ine stopped, and also tO incite these interested in sailin~ flight as a sport to compete ~~ith each other
and express tlmir opirlionson the su’eject,
The site was chosen on account of its being particularly
suitable for flight expe~iments with stopped engines. The result

of

the competition has since been published in all the

aeronautical publications.
The lecturer gave sme

details about the airplanes employed,

and said that many of them did not come up to the standard of
up-to-date technics.

It was, however, one of the ideas enter-

tained in getting up the competition that such airplanes should
be made an example of , and that %arnings should be given “against
defective improvisations. In constructing gliding flight airplanes, the ru~es laid down for the construction of airplanes
with engines need only be inforced regarding mini-mumweight,
highest possible utilization of material, the avoidance of nonIifting resistance and good flying qualities. The airplane made
by the Aeronautical Association at Aachen, which best embodies
the above conditions, was then fully described from a structural point of view.

-.

It’also came out first in the competition.

--

-.

.

---

-,...
,.

.

-’7-

The whole proceedings wer~ so successful on that occasion, that
there is every reason to hope a similar competition may be arranged for this year and as a re=gularinstitution in future.
gq@’’an’:a~@2ess
on
Major PARSEVAL, Prof. Dr. Eng. , t3.en.
.
“The Formatioa of Eddies on Lifting Surfaces.!’ He said that the
eddies found at the ends of the lifting surfaces of an ai~plane
are always found in pairs and xevolvin3 in opposite directions.
Examination shows that they drift slowly downnard and increase
greatly through taking in air fron the xear, whereby the air surrounding the eddy also takes part in the revolution. In so doing,
the energy contained decreases considerably.
The Helmholtz theory with re~ard to fxictionl.ess
fluid,
which ~ives the eddy as a stationary phenomenon %ich

c2nnot end-

in free fluid, should be applied to actual fluids in the sense
that the eddy ceztainly terminates in the free fluid, but that
it soon dispezses. The eddy is the dispersing process of the
energy which is mafily

produced in the form of forward movement

by the surfaces in the air.

This energy

moves circularly in the

eddy and is then transformed into heat through inner friction
in the air.

The direci influence of the eddy on.the lifting

surface is an unimportant increase in the resistance.
Dipl. Engineer ROHREACIlthen spoke about the lTRelations
between the Working Safety of the Airplane and the Constructional
me

of its’Power Installation.11 The test values hitherto ob–

served in aerial transport for the frequency of the various de-

. . . ..-—

.

. . ..

..-.

-—. -

-

.. z
.

-erangemeritsin the motor plant , are assumed io be a basis for
data on the working safety of such plant.

Comparison by calcu-

lating different single-engine and multi-engine aircraft plant,
as represented by corresponding curves, gave remarkably different xesults in tine-various
plants Investigated. The pzactical
experiments made so far, which proved the superiority of the
supervised engine, have been fully and entixely confirmed by the
results obtained by calculation. This shows that the expense of
maintaining and renovating airplanes is dependent to a great

ex-

tent, on the uore or less favorable method adopted for the engine plant.
In conclusion, Dr. KOSC.HEL,(M.D., D.phil.) formerly Staff
Amy

doctor, made a speech on the ‘!InvestiRation Mental Ef–
of

fic:iency
duxinq a Stay in Rarefied Air.n

Researches hitherto

made in aixplanes or airships cannot be said to have given entirely satisfactory results. The h~qn

organism is in itself

i-nfluenc&d external conditions, wnich give the impression of
by
excitement, fear, dizziness, etc.

In order to obtain incontest-

able results, Dr. 3SOSCHELcarried out his experiments in a pneumatic chamber in which the air was rarefied to a degree corresponding to that of the altitude desired. He made a most careful
examination ip.this chamber, of widely different tasks, caZlin~
for the action of the brain and mechanical transmission. The re.
suits were recorded with great precision and gave unquestionable
proof of the fact that disturbances of the organism, so-called

. . . . ..

..

.

. .. . .. .. . ._.

_

. _

——. — - —.—

. . .—-_

-%2altitude sickness, begins at about 6500 m. in the case
human beings.

of

normal

Here it is that lassitude of the mind, drowsiness

and unconsc
iousneSS fizst appear, and these symptoas are partly
accompanied by aoute pains.

Itithe transition to,lower layers of

air, tinesymptoms of.derangement again became evident.
On the last day of the proceedings, the ZEPPELIN WORxS AT
STAAEEN and the PRINCIPAL WIRELESS STATION at Nauen were visited.
The disastrous effects of the Versailles T~eaty were most painfully noticeable at Siaaken. The once prosperousworksbc?ps,
in

which more than 3000 wozkznen
eaxned their living, are now a dreazy
sight, and 200 men only can barely be kept at work on urgent
tasks of the most different order. And,the sword of Dzqzmcles,
demolition, hangs over the halls that are a perfect marvel in
the way of Gernan technical skill.
‘ THE WIRELESS STATION at ~auen presented a striking ’’oontras$ .
.

Staaken. Excellent guides were placed at the disposal of the
.
Party by the Beard of D@eotors, and it was thus possible to
to

form a d$stinct impression of the organization’ a modern termiof

#

nal station.

Translated from the German by the Parj.sOffice, N.A.C.A.

..

.

—..

.—

.

-.-. . .. . .. .

._

.

.-

\
i,

..

.
.

.

.

.

.

..’

,.i
.

.

1
I

i
1
i,

I

,.

,.
I
,1

