TECHNICAL NOTES.
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

No. 28

..

.

LOADS AND CALCULATIONS CF ARMY AIEPLANE&
——
*
‘ “By
Ing. Stelmacilowski.

,.

#

Translated from
Technische Berichte, Vol. 111, Sectioq 6,
By
Office of Naval Intelligence, U.S.N.
.

February, 2921.

NATIONAL ADVISORY CH3WITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 28.
LOADS AND CALCULATIONS OF ARMY AIRPLANES.
*
By
Ing. Stelmachowski.
‘Translatedfrom
Technische Berichte, Vol. 111, Section 6,
by
Office of Naval Intelligence, U.S.N.
-.

A military airplane must fulfill two conditions:
1.

It Must be aerodynamically capable of good perfor~ance.

2.

It must also be structurally strong enough to
-euver
without risk of faiiure.

be over–
emphasized-that an airplane of good flyirlgqualities is
useless if it is not sufficiently strong and fails at the
~ritica~ moment. A justified lack of confidence on the
part of the pilot in the strength of his ai~plane will pre–
vent him from taking oomplete advantage of its possible
merits. Therefoze a constm-ctor should not be criticised
for carefully investigating the strength characteristics of
his designs.
F7hatthen, must be the requirements for strength so
that a pilot fill have at his disposal a powerful but not
too heavy airplane. The answer depends on the magnitude
of the air forces or accelerations to Which the moving air–
plane is subjected. Investigations of these forces have
not been carried far enough so that they can always be estimated, and, where there is apparently a clear understand–
ing of the effect of the air forces, mathematical methods
for expressing these effects in useful form are lacking.
It is not even possible to cover all possible cases by full
flight investigations of these phenomena, since such maneu–
vers as an airplane pilot ventures or instinctively carries
out in moments of great danger can not be imitated inten‘:checked by D. L. Bacon, Assistant Physicist, Aeronautical
Laboratory, N.A.C.A,

-2tionally. It is in just szch “cases that the machine is
subjected to the most dangerous loads,
Because of these difficulties it is useful and necessary to be governed by experience. That is, if one
airplane of known strength has resisted all.the usual and
even the extrene air loads to which it cem be subjected
and if a second airplane having less strengt-h
than the
first was found, under.like conditions to be insufficiently strong, it is obvious that the strength required is
greater than that of the second airplane but not greater
than that of the first. If, as is now actually the case,
strength factors of different airplanes of the ssxaeclass
do not differ to any great extent, then the permissible
values are fairly well tiefined.
Gn the basis of such experience, aided.
by scientific
investigate
ions> standards have keen developed which are
satisfactory foz the calculation of airplane structures.
1. Loads on the Wing Truss.
Loads cn the wing tm.ussare expressed as multiples of
the weight of the airplane, the air forces which keep the
airplane in equilibrium bein~ pro~orti.onal
to its nei~ht,
If, furthermore, the admissi;l~ &d sim~lifying assum~tion
is made that the aiz forces which counteract zke forces of
acceleration on the wings of the moving airplane are equally distributed along the wirgs, then the air forces on the
~?ings
may be considered as being proportional to the quantity: Total wei~ht minus weiqht of wings.
Hence the weight of the wings themselves is not to be
included when calculating the stresses in the wing truss.
The wings are supported by the sustaining air pressure; and
that portion of the air forces that balances the farces of
acceleration on the wings, being equal and opposite arid
acting at the same points, can not give rise to any mcments
in the structure.
The numbers by vhich the quantity Total weight weight of win~s are to be multiplied in order to obtain the
a~plied load are called liLoadi%ctors.l! These vary accordin~ to the conditions of flight and have, fcr cor.v&ence,
been grouped under four representative conditions or ‘load
cases.“
1.
2.
3.
4.

Case
Case
Case
Case

A
B
C
D

–
—
–

Taking off (OZ large angle of incidence).
Gliding at 30° to the horizontal.
Nearly veztical dive.
Upside dorm flying.

-3Homve r, it would not be justifiable to use the same
1oad factors for a2.1types of airplanes even under the s=e
flight conditions. As already stated, the air forces on
the wings correspond to the acceleration forces on the moving airplane. Since the acceleration forces depend on the
rate of change of velocity they are therefore greater the
more rapid and maneuverable an airplane is. Since usually
the speed and maneuvering ability depend on the xeight or
useful load it is evident that types of airplanes can be
divided according tc weight or effective load into differ–
ent ‘calculation groups.tr Acoording to present practice,
ai~planes may M divided into five such groups:
Calculation grou231. Airplanes of any type of cmstrmtion having a flying weight greater than five tons;
i.e. , giant pianes that are required to cover great distances with the maxinnm possible useful load, abundant fuel
and bombs, but without great speed.
Calculation group II. Airplanes of two and one-half
to five tons flying weight and one to two tons useful load;
this includes small and short range bombers.
Calculation group III. Airplanes of two and one-half
to four tons flying weight and 1700 to 3300 lbs. useffi
ioad. This includes those larger flying machines which are
distinguished from those of groups I and 11 by greater
fighting value and consequently greater speed and mobility.
Calculation group IV. Airplanes of 2600 to 5500 13s.
flying weight and 900 to 1800 lbs. useful load. These include two-seaters for phonographic, reconnaissance, ~ttle
and scouting purposes.
Calculation grou~ V. All airplanes of less than 260J
lbs . (up to 900 lbs. useful load), hence single seaters and
light two-seaters of any kind.
0? course no sticfi.division
into classes can.be.carrect
in all details if it is intended to be general. In order
that the classification be pliable and afford room for new
types it has been decided that the Imperial Airplane Department be authorized to decide in which-group a new type should
be placed.
The load factors zequired can thus be originally determined from the fright conditions and calculation groups.
The accuracy of calculated factors depends on the exactnsss
with which the distribution of loads among the structural
members can be determined.
It is obvious that stress analysis may be avoided and

-4.,

the strength of the finished airplam demonstrated by s.md
loading. This was customary in fiLeearly days o~ airp?ane
ccm.straction;
new types were developed hy trial, the mac-n~ne~~.sc~p~etely
b~~lt
and
Sub;ecfied
to the
SZL.fl.d
l~ad.
This method no longer suffices, for umsoid~ble er~ors in
construction caused great losses in tifie,labor> a~d ra~
materials. TotiJ science gives tlieconstrw%cz mesas to
ca~.~Jlatethe required ~i~ensi~ns Of the s%i~~~”~urel
uzbers
from the beginning of the d=sign- Jhctkeraore, t~~~ it
also furnishes methods by which the best for~ -and rmst suitable coustruction consistent with lead w.ig-nt
~flaye &b
termirmi. In spite of this progress it is not possible,
owing to the lack of trained workers afiddeper.da’bl.
e s-:ruc–
tursl materials to entirely do away with sand loading.
.

Althmgh the strength of a flying r,achir~e
may have been
carefuliy calculated, it should still be required that its
structurallstrength be deruczmtated by a sa~d load.
r
The mathenatical calcul~tions of the strength of individual members of the wing truss do not exactly ccincide
with the resuits of the actual load tests. In the wthematical analysis the truss is considered as a s~ructure
built of separate and individually considered .aed!er~. ).Ctually, however, the wings do not act as me~e jointed fr=eworks of spars and compression struts, but, because of the
tided stiffness of ribs and fabric, act sofie~hat
like sep–
arate rigid bodies.

q

In the case of test lotiing these.influences ha~e an
effect whereas in calculation they are negle~ted. Acccrdingiy two require~ents
must w
satisfied
uncle condiiicus
r
A, B, and D, one for purposes of calculatio~, llsing10W
load factors, sad the other for sand testing with high load
factors. In case C a double require.meut not necassarY
is
for a high head zesistuce is indicated even by calculation,and because the relatire stiffness of the wings is
smaller in proportion to the tsrsional mw~ent while diving.
Tables I and II give the load factors compiled according to the above consideraticas, for stress ahalysis and
for s~d testing. The loads specified are breaking loads;
i.e.> under these loads t% members skould be s~ressed near–
ly to their ultimate strength. This does not mean that the
air forces eneo-mtered are actually &s great as the sand
loads specified. These factors include a cer~ain factor of
safety to allow for the nature of the load.and for the characte~istics of the st~mctural materials.
The followlng effects Lave been considered in ttiisconnection:

–51. The loading during flight is not constant but
changes suddenl. in such a nanner that the strength chary
acteristics of the materia.1~,
especisZ3.y
their 6tLtfIiCSS,
y
can not be fully developed. This includes hoth sud3enl
changing air loads and the effecl of mGto= v ikzaiiczls.
2. Some members are unduly stressed due to high and
indeterminate initial tensions in the stays.
3. Wooden members, such as spars, ribs, and struts
deteriorate through the action of-time and ‘Rather.
4. Experience shows that airplanes in quantity production generally are somewhat heavier than the original
model machine, due to subsequent changes and additions.
The foregoing affords a basis for the statement that
the values given in the table are for ultimate static loads.
It ~uld therefore be incorrect to assume a factor of safety when an-ystructural member appears to be loaded in ex–
cess of the safe limit of the material.
The increases in magnitude of the load factors in Table
11 over those in Table I are the result of experience. A
comparison between calculated strength and actual breaking
strengths has ShOm nC differences amounting to as much as
30$. These differences however decrease as the size cf airplane increases, and a corresponding allowance has been made
.
in the tables.
it seems superfluous to discuss in detail the prescribed
loads indicated in Fig. 1.

-5a-

Table I.

No. :FIying
.
.
I
11

Loa~ Factors for use i.nStress Analysis.

Vi@.

:over

lbs~Useful load Ibs:take:glid-:
div-:upside
.
.
: off: ing : ing? down
.5.5 : 2.5 : 1.2: -––q

11,000:

:5,500 -“ 11,000:2,200 -

4,400:4.0 : 2.5 : 1.5: ----

111

:5,500 -

9,000:1,800

-

3,300:4.5 : 3.0 :1.75: 2.5

IV

:2,500 -

5,500:

–

1,800:4.5 : 3.0 : 2.0:

2.5

800:5.0 : 3.5 : 2.0:

3.0

v

:less

%30

than 2,500:less than

Table II.

Load Factors Required in Sand Testing.

.

Group;
.

~Casej ~
:A
:

Type

j ~
.

~
:

~

No. :Flying wgt.lbs.:Useful load,lbs:take:glid-:div-:upside
.
.
.
.
: off: ing :in@ : down
I :aver
11 :5,500 -

11,000:

:4.0 : 2.5 : 1.2: ---–

11,000:2,200 -

4,400:4.8 : 2.6 : 1.5: ----

111 :5,500 -

9,000:1,890

-

3,300:5.5 : 3.2 :1,75: “2.8

IV :2,500 –

5,500: 900

-

1,800:5.7 : 3.3 : 2.0:

2.8

900:6.5 : 4.0 : 2.0:

3.5

V :less than 2,500:less than

* The factors for Case C apply to drag forces ‘butnot to
diving moments. -

-6As long
as no new developnents prove the insufficiency of these assumed loads we niay consider them TO represent the facts. An explanation is needed ho-sever,for
the increase in the divi~g moments iriCase C (Vertical Dive).
During a dive the air forces act so that the front part of
the wing experiences a pressure ftom above and the afte~
part a pressure from below. Thus a couple is set up, producing a moment about an axis pa~allel to the spars. According to recent tests in the Gottingen wind tunnel and
according to theoretical aerodynamic investigations the
moments formerly assumed have been too small. If the moment about a wing be expressed 3Y
Constant x Chord x (Drag Load) where
Drag on upper wing + Drag on lower wing $=
Total weight – ‘~.ightof wings,
then the constant must he so chosen that when multi~lied
by the chord it will give the proper moment arm.
From a numberof
values wsre fetid:

experiments the following aiver~~e
—

M upper wing = 1.75 R&per

cnord, instead of
~I&
chord.
3 upper ‘-:----

M lower wing = 1.75 #

lower

chord, instead of
~ Rx
chord.
3 lom3r

Experience shows that we have enough ~easurements ‘tith
the hitherto existing moments and load factors – except for
internal stresses in the Io=r wing -.LSOthat ~ would not
be justified in increasing the lever arm two and a half
times to increase the moments proportionately.
Returning, then, to known moments, load factoxs for
the moments in Case C are omitted. In order, however,
thl%ttoo small internal stresses shall not be obtairied,
the
partial forces acting as drag on the wing surfaces are multiplied by the corresponding load factors.
This requirement is not contradictory. It takes account of the fact 2hat the spars must be strong enough to
suit other loading conditions, ~ile the ints~al stresses
should be particularly investigated for diving conditions.

-7It should also be realized that in diving a large portion
of the air force is taken up UPOL the body and its appendages, which is not taken account of either in the calculations or in sand testing, thus, after experience with
the old requirements, the new ones ”must also suffice to
guard against insufficient dimensions.

L

Proportions of the Load Assumed by Upper and Lower Wings.
Lackir.gmore complete information on the subject all airplanes are calculated on the basis of a 11 : 9 ratio of load
distzi.bution
between upper and lower wings. Although this
is doubtless a good average value, it is not to be overlooked that a closer approximation to actual values would
be desirable. The division of load betmen upper and lower
wings depends on both gap and stagger, accordingly diagrams
are given in the 1918 edition Neuauflage Qer Bau - und Liefervorschriften showing’
this relation in terms of gap and
stagger. In Case C (Vertical dive).the division of load is
independent o: stagger,
Distribution of Air Forces Along the Span. Ve have
hitherto assumed the air pressure to be evenly distributed
along the wing span. Thi; is not entirely correct as the
pressure diminishes near the wing tips and withia the area
of slip stream. For purposes of calculation the ;>ressure
per unit length ~ is assumed to decrease from P
t a
B
point one chord length distant from the wing tip to ~ at
the extreme tip. For calculating the span itself th~ full
pressure P is assumed to extend to the wing tip.
~nsynznetricalLoading. All previous considerations
have reference to a load symmetrically distributed on both
sides of the central axis.- In curved-flight however the
load is no longer symmetrical. Nevertheless, no special
load case has been introduced for unsymmetrical loads because.the cabar.eand the body longerons supporting it are
the only parts unusually stressed.
11. Loads on Control Surfaces.
In determining the loads on control surfaces the same
difficulties are encouiitered
as with the main supporting
surfaces. As far as the contrcl surfaces ther.selvesare
concerned the loading is unimportant as they are so small
that a high factor m&ht easily be obtained with negligi–
ble increase in weight. ‘The control surface loadings are
important ho”%vsr i~ proportioning the ~embers of the body
which support them. Because of its rigid construction the
body is usually to be considered as a sing~e unit, and
changes in the position of the center of pressure on the
tail cause only a slight variation in the moments on the

-8–
body, so that only the magnitude of these forces is of importancea The task is thus essentially simplified, it cnly xemains to discover what are the msximum possible loads
on the tail surfaces.
The tail surface load may be expressed by
2g
and is principally influenced by the speed and the constant.
The maximum speeds for any type of machine are knom ap–
proximately or are specified. The maximum value of q de- .
pends on the angle of incidence of the fin and the dis~lacement of th~ rudder. As these are limited by the constriction of the machine it will suffice to conside$ the
least favorable case. The Research Laboratory at Gottingen
has carried out a great many investigations of control surfaces* tiich have furnished reliable data for calculation.
The following loads are specified for the various type
classifications, which furnish a basis of comparison regardless of speed.
Table III Specified Tail Plane Loads.
.
.

:V:,
I
: II. : 111 : ~
.
.
.
.
.
.
Average Load lbs/sq.ft. ~ 24.6 ~ 24.6 i 30.’?; 36.9 ; 41 i
Group Number

.

.

.

.

.

Average Load

.

The values givsn in this table agree closely with recent
practice. Because of possible damage to surfaces during
shipment and handling, fins on airplanes of Group I are calculated on a basis of 200 Kg/~ and of Groups 11 to V inclusive on a basis f 300 Kg/m . Rudders are likewise calculated at 200 IQ/m2 . Experience has shown that rudders so
designed are sufficiently stiff and strong.
111 Loads on Wing Ribs.
The nature of rib loads has been previously considered
in Technische Berichte, Vol. 1, No.3, p. 81. The sane load
factors are used as for the wing truss in Cases A, B, and
D. In Case C the moment specified for the truss should be
increased 50~. The strength of wing ribs must always be
deuonstratecl
by trial loading for, because of the minute di* Technische Berichte, Vol. I, NO.~, p.168.

“

-9mensions of the component parts, mere calculation is inq@ficient.
IV Loads on Landing Gear.
:

Fig. 2.
Three conditions of loading are to be considered (see
Fig. 2). A load directly under one wheel (force A), a retarding foroe (force B) and a side load (force C).
Forces A and B or A and G act simultaneously and smount
at least to the following multiples of the static loads per
wheel (one half to%al weight for two wlneeled
airplanes).
.
.

Force : Multiple
.
.
A:6
.
.

B:4
C

.
.

:

0.6

V Calmlation.

,

Static investigations are carried out according to es–
tablished methods. For load distribution betmen members
of the wing truss it is immaterial what loading is used, for
the stresses are proportional to the load and can subsequently be found for any load factor. In contrast to this are the
fiber stresses in members, such as wing beams, under compression and bending loads where the stres~~g are not directly proportional to the load faotor but to an exponential function
thereof.

-1oFor what load factor, should the calculations then be
carried out? The static analysis would be m~st exact ‘nider
loads which do not stress the members above their elastic
limits. This procedure is, however, subject to ohjectior.s.
1. For wood, the most common structural material, the
elastic 1imit is d:fficult or impossible to deftae, aad varies so much under different conditicjnsthat Zt does not furnish a good basis for calculation. The ultimate strength, haever, for any cross section and type of lGading may be determi~~ed~t~ sufficier~t
accuracy.
2. As already stated, the specified load factors do
not represent the actually experienced air 1oads but also
include effects of vibration, deterioration of material, etc.
It is iupcrtant however that the constructor know the behavior of the members under breaking 1oad. As no simple relation bet‘seenload and strain exist he would be unable to
tell, tien cal~ulating with light loads, whether the deflections for ultimate load exceeded the limits of safety.
Therefore, if it is not practicable to carry through
calculations for several different 1oad values, it is advisable to make the static armlysis for the ulti~ats load.
In calculating wing spars the application of loads rcust
be considered with especial care. Euler’s formula does not
apply to short struts and the strength of these should be
found by experiment as Tetrnajer’sformuia does not hold for
struts of hollow section.
VI Rigidity of Materials.
The accuracy of static analysis depends on the use of
correct value3 for the elasticity of the structural parts.
For both wGod and duralumin, the maierials most used, t-he
coefficients of elasticity and elastic limits are so de~~end–
ent on the size and skape of the member that in some circumstances large errors would be introduced by the use of their
average values. This is also true for steel cables. It is
therefore essential that the elasticity be measured in each
individual case on specimens ‘which
check exactly wit?l
the required dimensions, and which are subjected as nearly as possible to the desired load. The elastic curve of cables is
therefore to be obtained by the use of actual lengths and
cross sections, and with due regard to splices and thimbles,
in at least three tests.
The determination of elasticity in spars under exact
flight conditions, i.e., under compression end bending loads,

-11-

i.snot usually convenient -becauseof the lack of time and of”
laboratory facilities. However, it is considered satisfactory to obtain the elasticity of a beam eccentrically loaded as shown in Fig. 3.
.

..,.
.

The length of the specimen must be equal to the distsm’cebetween panel points on the wing, and the ~@XntricitY &
must be so chosen that the maxitim bending moment produced
will be equal to that on the aotual sPar.
In order to estinate the distance ~ a.fikst approximation ET iS assumed, and & is calctiated from
..a

= Maximum bending,load on spar.
.*-S---~{”
*
.,

A

C08[;

The ‘testcan then be carried out by gradually increasing S
to tbe breakir.gload, measuring the deflection in the center S after eaoh increase in load. The value of Sma. imme~
diately before rupture is of the greatest importance, therefOXe especial care is nacessary at this point oz the experiment wizl be worthless. Using Sm= the correct coefficient
of elasticity E, for use in calcu,lati’ng
breaking 10S& is.
obtained from
.

-----

-

a
.. . .

