REPORT No. 38.
AIRPLANE

DOPES

AND

DOPING.

By W. H. EhcrrH.
.
HISTORICAL.

C&dose acetate and cellulose nitrate are the important constituents of airplane dopes
in use at the present time, but planes were treated with other materials in the experimental
stages of flying. The above compounds belong to the class of colloids and are of value because
they produce a &inking action on the fabric when drying out of solution, raudering it drum
tight. Other colloids posswing the same property have been proposed and tried. In the first
stages of the development of dope, however, shrinkage was not considered. The fabric was
treated merely to render it waterproof.
The first airplantx constructed were covered with cottan fabric stretched as tightly as
possible over the wings, fuselage, etc., and flying was possible only in fine weather. The nec~~ity
of an airplane which would fly under all weather renditions at once became apparent. Then
folIowed experiments with rubberized fabrics, fabrica treatad with glue rendered insoluble by
formaldehyde or bichromate, fabrics treated with drying and nondrying oils, shellac, casein,
etc. It was found that fabrics treated as above lost their tension in damp weather, and th~ oil
from the motor penetrated the prooilng matarial and weakened the fabric. For the most part
the film of material used lacked durability.
Cellulose nitrate lacquera, however, were found to be more satisfactory under varying
weather conditions, added less weight to the planes, and were easily applied. On tha other
hand, thsy were highly inflammable, and oil from the motor penetrated the film of cdulose
nitrata, causing the tion
of the fabric to be relaxed. The film does not possoss the objectionable britthmess of glue or casein, and, in general, this typ of dope had much in its favor.
About the year lf)lo, the Bayer Cu., of Elberfeld, Germany, begin to exploit a type of
cellulose acetate known ss CdJit for use on airpkmes. This material had been used in the
preparation of a noninflammable calhloid called CeIIon. Experiments were made with thin
sheets of Cellon, which were fastaned to the fabric ta protect it, and this suggested the use of
cellulose acetate m solution. h 1910, acetate dopes were used and found to produce a sat&
factory shrinkage, and ta be proof against watar, oil, and gasoline. Such dopes were more
expensi~e than nitrate dopes, but the nonhdiamm ability of the acetate tim uused a slow but
general adoption of cellulose acetata solutions. At the present time such dopes are considered
the best for use on aircraft.
Dopes are also used on belloon fabric b reduce the permeability of the fabric to gas. The
English Governmmt uses Delta dope for this purpose, a nitrate dope containing sufkient castor
oil ~o make it nortshrinking. The Navy Department has used Delta dope on certain airships,
on which the fabr c had becume too permeable to gas, and satisfactory results were obtained.
The use of acetate dopes on balloons is recei~
consideration.
COMFOSITION

OF DOPES.

,

A dope consiste of the cellulose ester dissolved in suitable solvents to which diluents are
added, with the addition of plastim and a compound to neutralize the tracas of acidity in the
solvents, or the acidity which may develop in the film. The solvent cont&ns a compound of
410

-——.-.
-.. —
— -—
..—

..—

— -...—.
.--

.-

MEPLANE

DOPES Aii DOI?IITG.

411

high boiling point which allows the celhdose ester to emerge from the solvent mixture in a
transparent condition, free from precipitated celhdose ester which appears in the film in streaks
or spots. The development of such whitened areas is known as “bhding.”
It results from
the application of dope in a humid atmosphere, or from the rapid evaporation of low-boiling
solveute and diIuente, or both. b th~ presence of a high-boiling solvent, the moisture has a
chance to evaporati before the film is dry, and the callulose ester is not precipitated. The
amount of the” high boiler,” as it is frequently called, depends upon its boiling point. If the
latter is high, 1sssof the compound is needed than when it is 10W. Solvents with boiling p&nts
A high-boltig diluent maybe premnt in nitratebetween 125° and 200 C. are generally us~
dopes to assist in the prevention of blushing.
Diluenti geuerally consist of mixtures of alcohols and hydrocarbons, and frequently denatured almhol and benzene are used.
Plastics are occasionally used in nitrate dopes, but are always present in acetate dopes.
The nitrate film has sufllcient inherent strength and elasticity without further modification,
but a smd amount of castor oil or camphor is sometimes incorporated in it. AcetyI celhdoee,
however, is inherently brittle and certain softening bodies or plastics must be added to it in order
to impart supplauess and increase its life. A plastic is frequently a did of low melting point,
sometimes a liquid or a mixture of liquids, and general~y a solvent of the ceh.lose ester with
which i~forms a soLidsolution. A end amount of the’ ‘high boiIer” is aIways left in the dope
film, and this also plasticizes it. A suitable base is generally present in the film to neutralize
acidity. The basa commonly used i{ urea.

.. . .

——.
.-

-.

. ..-

CELLULOSE NITRATE DOPES.

CelluIose nitrate or guncotton is produced by the nitration of cotton or some form of
oelhdose approximating the degree of purity of cotton. For dopes a low nitrated cottin is
desirable. It must be stable in order that no decomposition with development of acidity may
occur. The high boiler in nitrate dopes is generalIy amyl acetate or butyl acetate. The former
is a product of fusel oil and the latter is prepared from butyl alcohol, a by product in the production of acetone by fermentation. The diluent is generally a mixture of denatured alcohol
and benzene, although methyl alcohol, methyl acetone, and xylol are also employed. A Io-wboiling solvent, such as ethyl acetat~, may be ako present. ‘l%e solvent and diluent combination used in nitrate dopes is influenced by the degree and method of nitration, and therefore
is subject to considerable variation.

..-—
-.

CELLULOSE ACETATE DOPES.

The manufacture of cellulose acetate is a technical art, demanding careful supervision end
control. Variations of a few degge= of temperature during the process have an advwse effect
upon the product. The correct preparation of the material is known only to a few chmists.
It is quite &fEcuIt to make two batches of the ester alike, and frequently there is trouble in
spite of dlorts to keep the cpdity uniform. The materiaI is a white solid, its appearance
depending upon the method employed for its precipitation. A good cellulose acetate k an
ssbmtos-like quality when rubbed between the fingers.
At the outbreak of hostilities in this country, dopes were prepared from scrap acetate
film. These dopes did not give results in service, which shouId be expected of cellulose acetate.
The ti
scrap was frequently old st.oc~ and contained pIastics. In the preparation of dope
it was dissolved in suitable solvents with the addition of dope plastica. On this account tie
dope film was frequently ovedoaded with softening agents.
The commonest “high boiler” used in this country in acetate dopes is &acetone alcohol:
a product of acetone obtained by condensation in the presence of lime. h Germany, before
the war, ethyl hwtate was the “high boiler” in common use. This substance has a tendency
to breakup into ethyl alcohol and hmtic acid unless certain compounds are added to it to make
it stable. Methylethyl ketone in suitable amount also prevents bhshing, but not as electively
as the preceding compounds, unbs a considerable amount is present. In this connection it.

—

.—
—
--

-.

-—

412

~N_LJfi EEPOET NATIONAII ADVISORY COMMITZEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

may be pointed out that a suitable proportion of alwhcd and benzene, when present in the dope,
removes much of the moisture present. A certain mixture of ahmhol, benzene, and water has
a higher vapor pressure. than any of its constituents, and when this mixture rceulta. during
evaporation water is readily removed. Acetone .cils aw.also .usc.das high boilers, but the composition of these Qils varies greatly; and, because they may break up with the development of
acidity unless carefully purified, they have not found as much favor as compounds of known
purity.
Solvents are usually acetone, methyl acetate, methyl acetone, tetrachlorethane, and ethyl
formate. Acetone has not been used during the period of hostilities because it has been needed
in the preparation of cordite and for other purposes. The preparation of methyl acetate involva
lees consumption of acetato of lime than the production of acetone, and honco has been preforrcd because its usc conserves raw material. Methyl acetone,is. a product of the de+stmctive
distillation of wood. Tt is largely a mixture of acetone and methyl alcohol, and when the latter
is acetylated, water removed, and acid present neutrabed, a good solvent results. The composition of methyl acetone varies cmakhddy, ad somtimw itisnec=s~y ~ ficre=ei~
a
solvent power by the adtltion of IIICtiylcetateor acetone. Tetrachlorethane was formerly a
plastic and
favorite solvent in acetate dopm. It combines the functions of a sdyentind
dissolves cellulose acetatw of a.wid~ degree of hydration. However, ita vapor has been shown
to be about four times as toxic. w that of cMomform ~~d.unle~ pllre it dccompsm and CaUSOS
deterioration of the fabric. The vapor of the compound causes jaundice, and in England
several fatalities resulted in the application of dopes containi~~ it. The decomposition of
tetmcldorethane can be prevented by the use of suitablo pigments, and the danger attending
its application could. be ntied
if all doping rooms were provided with adequate means
of ventilation. Unfortunately, ideal conditions of ventilation do not cccist, and onc by ono,
the alIies have all abandoned the use of tetrachlorethtme dopes. France and Italy have even
ruled out dopes containing chlorine in any form.
Ethyl formate has not been used h the .T.Mted Stat@ ?mt is a?lowed by the British~vernment. It is an excellent solvent.
Diluents commonly used are denatured alcohol and benzene, sometimes methyl alcohol,
either added as such or present in methyl acetone. CeUulose acetate dissolvm in a mixture of
alcohol and hydrocarbon when warmed and is reprecipitatod in the cold, but the solubility
persists in the presence of a solvent of cellulose acetate such as acetone. When the ratio of
hydrocarbon to alcohol is three to one, an incrcascd amount of dilu.ent may bc uacd.
The plastics which have bccm proposed for use in acetate dopes include many compounds,
some of which are much superior to others. Benzyl alcohol is used by tho British Government.
Mixtur@ of eugenol and triacetin haw found.favor in France. In this country, the commonest
are phenyl salicylate, which is an excellent softenar, mixtures of benzyl benzoate ~d benzyl
acetate, benzyl acetate alone, and triacetin. Triacetin is water soluble, and may dccomposo with the liberation of acetic acid. Triphenylphosphato is in universal use in acetate
dopes. It--waterproofs and fireproofs the .ilhn, and is an excellent softenor. When used in
oxceas; however, triphenylphosphate softens in war& weather and makes the acetate film
soggy. Urea is used in small amount to neutralize any free acid which maybe present.
DOPE COVEBS.

The dope, as has been previously mentioned, protects the fabric, keeping it taut, m flying.
is possible under aU weather conditions. .It is S!aOIWCWWWto protect tho dop~ ~
by mvcri~ it with some suitable coating containing pigments to exclude light rays. Either pigmented
dopos or varnish enamels arc used for this purpose. It has b&n conclusi~cly proven by Dr.
Ashton, attached to the Royal Aircraft Factory, that the deterioration of dopos is practically
entirely caused by sunlight.. His results show that the .c.u.rveof the intensity of sudight- and
the curve of deterioration of doped fabrice are almost identical. It is therefore more feasible
ta use a pigmented dope or a pigmented wood-oil vmi~,
rath~r than ~lear dope or v~sh
as a dope cover. Clear varnish has unti~ rccently bcon used in We country on Army plmms.

,

AIRPLANE DOPES AND DOPING.

413

The Navy has used a gray, pigmented varnish enamel. Dr. Ramsbottom, also attached to
the Royal Aircraft Factory, has recently demonstrated that doped fabrics covered with pigmented dope retain t-heir tautness longer than similar fabrics covered with an enameL He
also demonstrated that a pigmented dope retains its tautness best of all, and that such a dope
effects a considerable saving of cellulose acetate. The English Government for a long time has
used a type of pigmented dope, khaki colored by iron pigments and lampb]ack, which is ceiled
P. C. 10. It is a nitrate dope containing the pigments and sufficient castor ofi to reduce ta a
minimum the shrinkage ordinarily effected by a dope. Reports from the front indicate that
the use of such a cover has been attended by excelIent retention of the tautness and durability
over a long period, and Dr. Ramsbottom’s suggestion regard~a pigmented dopes therefore
merits serious consideration.

—

APPLICATION OF DOPES.

In the application of dopes to fabrics, it shotid be remembered that the fabric does not
of itself shrink in the sense that mercerization causes shrinkage. In other words, there is
no physical ch~me occurring in the fabric. The dope Wn contracts when drying out of solution
and diminished the apace between the threads, the total effect of which is slightiy to reduce
the original area of the fabric. The British Government at one time used a dilute solution of dope next to the fabric. This was calIed a scratch coat. The dope contained very
little softening agent and produced mtium
shrinkage. The scratch coat, however, was
found to reduce the tear resistance of the fabric and was, therefore, abandoned. Such a
coat~m penetrates the fabric -mry thoroughly and ~ocks the fibers and threads. It is apparent
that the viscosity of the dope must permit of some penetration, so that the dope will not peeI
off, but the penetration must not be excessive. The amount of size in the fabric to some extent
influence9 penetration. The tit coat of dope is well worked into the fabric and subsequent
coats are flowed over it, care being taken not to go over a given area more than once or twice,
or the doping brush will drag_on the dope fihn. Su.flicient dope is applied to produce a weight
increase of 2 ta 2.5 ounces per square yard. The Army spetications require four coats of
dope on all planes, and specify nitrate dope on train~m plenee and acetate dope on combat
planes. Two coate of clear varnish or enamel are applied over the dope.
The Navy Department specifies two coats of acetate dope over the fabric, followed by three
coats of nitrate dope and two coats of navy~ay
enameL The idammable nitrata dope is
thus laminated between the relatively fln+resietant acetate dope and the enamel, the pigment
in which also tiords resistance to fire. It has been contended that the w of one type of
dope above the other may produce two films of diflerent physical properties, but to date no
trouble has been experienced by the Navy in the durability of dopes applied as above.
FIREPROOFED

.,- — .-

—
—
—.
4.-.

—

—.

.

.

-.
-.
-.—
—.
—

--

—

DOPES.

Inasmuch as nitrate dope is comparatively cheap and acetate dope expensive, numerous attempta have been made to reduce the inflammability of the nitrate film. This has been
attempted by fireproofing the fabric or dope or both. ?lireproo~~ ia generally effected in one
of three ways-by encasing the materiaI in a coating of inert mimd salts, by using compounds
which decompose with the liberation of a gas which checks combustion, or by incorporat~~
an organic fireproof@ compound in the dope flm.
hy compound used for check@ the spread of combustion should not dissociate with
an acid or alkaline reaction in the presence of moisture, as acids, particularly mineral acids,
attack the fabric, and alkalies have a saponify@ action on cellulose esters and certain plastics.
A great vtiety of fireproofing”solutions for fabrics and he-resistant dopes have been submitted
to the Bureau of Standards for examination. ‘I’he beat treatment for fabrics has been found
to be a 10 per cent solution of ammonium phosphate neutralized with ammonia. This has been
found to exert no deleterious action on fabric or dope. Soluble chlorides in general have been
found to weaken the fabric.

—
-—.
.— ....

_
——
----

414

EORXllEONAUTIOS.
ANNUAL
REPORT
lJA!rIONAL DVISORY OMW’J5XW
A
C

Several pigmented fireproofed dopes have been examined, The pigments used have consietad of &Jy ground ammonium phosphate or magnesium ammonium phosphate. These are
incorporated in suitable proportion in a tie state of division k a nitrate dope. The dope is
applied alternately with clear dope, one coat of pigmented dope on the fabric, then clesr dope,
then pigmented, etc. fi-ve coats k all. A pigmented varnish is applied over the dope.
Several fireproofed dopes resembling an EngIish product called “ titsnine dope” have also
been submitted. These consist of nitrate dopes containing chlorides of sine, calcium, or
msgneaium added in alcoholic solution. The hygroscopicity of these salts is objectionable,
and such dopea tend to become ahwk on the fabric in humid weather. This cau be overcome
in part by laminating the dopes betvmn coats of clew. dope.
Nitrate dopes may aIso be fireproofed by incorporating tricreaylphosphate or hexacblor+
thane in the dope tire, The former compound ia preferable and forms a better solid solution
with cellulose nitrate than triphenylphosphate. It is necessary to fireproof the fabric when
dopes of this type are applied.

;

