REPORT

NO.

41.

TESTING OF BALLOON GAS.
By Jmrm

DAVID EDWARDS.

TM report was prepared at the Bureau of Standards for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
In the generation, storage, and use of hydrogen for balloon purposes it is necessary to be
able to determine, first, its lifting pow~, and, secondyj its purity. The lifting power may
be determined directly from the specifk gravity. Contamination by other gases maybe d~
termined by analysis ‘for oxygen, o-~bon dioxide, etc., by the
usual methods of gas analysis. The detmnimdion of omen
is importmt, since the presence of o~gen in amounts beyond
certain limits wiU make the compressing, handling, and use of
the gas particularly hazardous. If the specidcgravity of the ga9
is known, however, it may not be necwsary to analyze the gas
for oxygen and other gasee, beoauee the spediogravity itsell is a
delicate criterion of the purity of hydrogem
The -Ion
method of dekmninkg the specific gravity of
a gas is probably the simplest method available. It is based
upon the fact that the times of mape of equal vohunes of two
ga9ea through the same smill orifice are approximately proportional to the square roots of the densities of the two gases.
This method hes been extensively investigated by the author
and the full details of this work are given in Bureau of Standard
Technologic Paper No. 94 on the “EYlueion method of deterIt was shown in this report that the ~. L_a~_
~PI@.mining g-m de~ity.”
forgwa.
tna
tiuaion apparatus as commonly made and used may give very
inaccurate results, particularly when used with hydrogen,’ since hydrogen shows the largest
errors of any of the common gems when tested by this method. The limitations of this
method were pointd out and the principks which should govern the construction of sFLtiefactory apparatus were demonstrated.
With this work as a basis, the Bureau of Standards designed a simple portable apparatus
for testing hydrogen. The novelty lies not so much in the general form of the apparatus but
in the size and shape of ita vtious parts, parthkdy
the orifica, which me selected empirically
to give a close approximation to the correct result.
Demripiion of apparatus.—The general pkm of the apparatus is shown in @ure 1, which is
approximately one-fourth size. The apparatus consists of a gas chamber (0) connected by a
rubber tube at the bottom ta a movable reservoir (Z), which maybe held at a tied height in a
support, as shown. The volume of gas whose ef7usiontime is to be measured is d&ned by marks
on the tubes just above and below the gas chamber. The gas chamber is surrounded by a
water jacket, to keep it at a constant temperature, and is coynected at the top to a three-way
cock, which permits it to be connected with either the gas irdet (I) on the left or the tube (0),
containing the o*,
on the right. By lowering the reservoir L and connecting the gas chamber
with the gas inlet through the three-way cock a sample of g= may be drawn into the gss
439

—

——-

.—
-—
—
,-. —

470

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL

ADVISORY COMMITJ!EE FOR AERONAUTICS.

chamber; tho cock is then closed and the reservoir replaced on ita support. The effusion time
is obtained by connecting the gas chamber with the orifice and measuring, with a stop watch,
the time of passage of the water meniscus between the two marks. In brief, the method of
making a testis to measure the time required for the measured volume of air to flow through the
orifice under the pressure of the head of water in the remrvoir, and then to measure the time
required for the same volume of tha hydrogen to flow through the orifice. The operating details
and precautions to be observed % explained in detaiI in Technologic Paper No. 94, previously
referred to.
Certain features of the design are wsential to securing satisfactory results. The orifice
itself is the most important part of the apparatus. It is made in a stiff platinum-iridium plate,
The orifiw% 0.25 millimeter in diameter and is made by a
0.04 millimeter in thickn-s.
small punch am-ldie. The edges of the ofice on the side of the plate through which the punch
entered are necessarily somewhat rounded. The edges on the other side are polished down quite
sharp on very fine emery paper. The orifice is then sealed into a ghea tube, which is cemented
into the metal holder. It is absolutely essential that the orifioe be attached in suoh a position
that the sharp-edged entranoe of th~ orifice be on the side toward the effusing gas. If the
entrance to the orifice is appreciably rounded, the apparent specific gravity of hydrogen as
determined with it will probably be high.
Very low effusion pressures, at which the Iargeet errora occur, are avoided by placing the
leveling bulb some distance abovw the gas chamber. The three-way cook is made of metal to
avoid breakage; the barreI is made large and accurately machined to prevent leaka and for
convenience in setting. A pin is arranged to stop the cock always in exactly the same position
when connecting the gas chamber with the orifice.
Cc&u&z#ion 8pecijo gravity. —The specific gravity of a gas may be deiined as the ratio of
of
the weight of a given volume of g= to the *eight of an equid volume of air measured at the same
temperature and pressure. The specific gravity of a dry gas referred to dry air is, for all practical
purposes, the same for any temperature. But the specific gravity of dry”hydrogen compared
with dry air is always diflerent from the speoific gravity of saturated hydrogen referred to
saturated air. Moreover, the latter value is different at different tcmperaturm and pressures
The spec~c gravity of the hydrogen under the conditions of tit is the ratio of the square
of the time for hydrogen effusion ti the square of the time for air effusion, i. e.,
(1)

The following equations show the relation between the specific gravities of saturated hydrogen compared with saturated air and the specitlc gravity of dry gas referred to dry air. Tho
derivation of these forrmdae is given in Technologic Paper 94.
(S+k)

1+”~-8-s,

---

,

(l+k)–lc

(2)
(3)

S-Specific gravity of dry gas refereed to dry air.
& =Speoific gravity of saturated hydrogen referred to saturated air.
The values of k for gas at 760 millhnetara’ pressure, and at various temperatures are
as foUowe:
~ABLE

~.—vaked

of h at

760 nd~hn+?hwa nd variow
a

m

tmperatureu.

“:”:”’” :: ““”.“
-

TESTING

OF BALL0019

GA9.

471

Either the Iifting power or the purity can be calculated from the specific gravity of the gas.
If the purity is to be calculated, some assumption must be made as to the composition of the
contaminating gsses. It is USUdy satisfactory tO sssume that the contamination is air unless
there is resson t.abelieve otherwise. The purity can then be calculated from the epeciflc gravity
by mesns of equation 4.
Purity (per cant hydrogen] -107.6 (1 –&)
(4)
If the purity of the gse contained in an inflated enveIope is ta be estimated from a determination of the oxygen content, it is usually incorrect to assume that the impurity is air,
becsuse rubber is more permeable to oxygen then nitrogen, snd the air which penetrates the
fabric (Bureau of %andsrds Technologic Paper No. 113, p. 25) is richer in o~gen than the
atmosphere. Consequently the total impurity, oxygen and nitrogen, would be less tlitm corresponded h air of the s~e oxygen contant. Because of the sndl difkence in the densities of
oxygen and nitrogen this faotor can be neglected in cahdating tie purity from the spedc
gravity. However, it may make the purity calctdated from the oxygeu content as much as
6 to 10 per cent 10W.
Accuracy of metlod.-Wit.h reasonable care in the operation of the apparatti successive
determinations should egree within 0.1 to 0.2 per cent hydrogen. The per cent hydrogen ss
calculati from the speciiic gravity is usudy within 0.2 to 0.3 of the correct*.
The method
of making the orifices h= dted
in great uniformity and the performance of different pieces
of apparatus is correspondingly satisfactory.

.—

---

APPENDIX.
NOTEON THEEFFEC1’ WATER VMOR IN EYDIZOGEN UPON THE LIFTING POWER OF THE CM%
OF
h connection with the discussion of the purity of hydrogen it is interesting to note the
effect of water vapor upon the Ming power of hydrogen. The specific, gravities of hydrogen

r

and water vapor sre 0.0696 and 0.622. The reduction in lifting power of hydrogcm when satuis shown by plot 2.
rated with water vapor at ~erent temperatures
If hydrogen is compressed in cylinders and the cylinders contain some water in the liquid
form, then the hydrogen will be saturated with watar vapor at the tmnperature of the cylinder
and each vohme of the high-pressure hydrogen will contain the same vohuue of water vapor
as it wouId if under a pressure of one atmosphere aud at the same temperature; hence when it
is withdrawn from the cylinder and expanded ta the lower premre it conti
only a relatively
small amount of watar vapor per unit volume. The gss is, therefore, comparatively dry if it
hes been expanded from a high pressure. The magnitude of the loss in lifting power at one
temperature (30° C.) md different pressures is shown in plot 3. The data in pIot 3 are computsd on the assumption that the gas will be expanded from the high pressure to atmospheric

—.

472

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL

ADVISORY COMMITTEE

FOR AERONAUTICS.

pressure without either mechanical entrainment of liquid water that maybe in b high-pressure
oontainer or absorption of water vapor from this liquid during the period of expansion of the gas.
In considering the advantages of using dry hydrogen for inflating balloons the fact should
not be overlooked that rubberized balloon fabrios are somewhat permeable to wafar vapor.

‘l%erefom, even though the gas is put into the balloon dry it will become partialIy saturated
with water vapor which penetrates the fabric and will ultimately approximate the moisture
condition of the surrounding atmosphere.

