,
.
b

.

TECHNICAL N@ES.
.
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

No. 60
———.

-.

ON A NEW TYPE OF WINI)TUNNEL.
By
*%.XMiuzik
,
NatLonal Advisory Committee for Aeronautits.

.>
t

.-

May; 1921.

*-4

—-

,..

NATTONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTIC%
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 60.
ON A NEW TYPE OF WIND TUNNEL.
By
Max Munk.
National Advisoxy Committee for Aeronwtios.

Introduction.
The difficulties involved in conducting tests on airplEnes
and airships in actual flight$ difficulties greater in the early
years of aviation than now, and the matter of expense also, induced investigators to seek for information through tests upon
models.

The first of such tests was made by moving the model

through stationary air eithex by means of a whirling arm or in
a straight line.

Later the method adopted was to suspend the

model in a curxent of aix
*

of this type have beoae

flowing in a large tube.

Wind tunnels

of increasingly great importance.

At first the tunnels were only small pieces of physical apparatus
in a laboratory, but at last they require an entire building. ,
The latest wind tunnel of the Zeppelin Company in Germany provides a current of air ten feet in diameter, whioh has a velocity of 110 mi/hr. and absorbs 500 H,P.
The results obtained with this type of wind tunnel are of
very great wilue

and at the present time they are the chief

source.of information h r the aircraft designer. However, there

are certain criti~s who declare that

the resuits of wind tunnel

.2US

,

. tests are valueless for purposes of design.

Indeed, justifica-

tion for such opinions is not wholly lacking. There is, in fact,
no necessary and exaot connection between the motion of air

around a small airp3.ane
mode> and that arbund the full-sized airplane. Sbrnetimes
the results of the tests on models agree well
with:those observed with the airplane it~elf; but important
cases

are Mown where the two do not agree.

~estions
signer

Further, there are

the answers to which it is most imports.rit
for the de-

to have, and yet the answer deduoed from tests of models

q

in wind.tunnezs would be absolutely wrong.

There is always an

uncertainty connected with such tests, because one is never quite
sure whether or not the results thus obtained may be applied to
full-sized bodies.
In spite of this uncertainty, wind tunnels have been of the
greatest use in the development of aeronautics. Test6.upon models led to the construction of streamlined bodies having small
r

resistance, and of aerofoils of gocd seotiono Experiments in
wind tunnels led to the discovery of the theorems referring to
the lift of aerofoils end to the effect of combining several
aerofoi3.s. A wind tunnel is still the most important means avai~able for scientifi~ tests.- It c~not be denied, however, that
it is becoming more and more difficult to find a problem suits-’
ble for study by a wind tunnel, whioh om

be immediately applied

in aeronauttgs. Mamy tests of a theoretiml

charaoter canbe

suggested, but it is diffioult to interpret them.

There are mars

important and urgent tests with respect to the design of aimer~.
.

,

-3.

whioh should be performed; but the results would be worthless
if they were carried out in a wiqd tunnel of the present type.
The theory of non-viscous motion is almost complete; the tests
referriqg to it have been made, and the field of investigation
lying between non-viscous r.otionand actual motion in the air
is cultivated so intensely that it is diffioult to find a new
problem.
For all these reasons, the author believes that his propo-

4

sition to’make use of compressed air in a new type of wind tunnel
comes at the right moment.

Tests in such a tunnel will give in-

formation ‘concerningthose questims which cculd not be investigated with the present tunnels bemuse

of the exaggerated effect

‘of viscosity, The new type of tunnel is free of the uncertainty
characteristic ,ofthe older t~ype~and will indicate clearly what
problems may be undertaken with,the latters

It will make un-

necessary many full-flight tests, and will mark a step in advan=
in aeronautics.
Let us then consider this new type of wind tunnel; its.advantages

the difficulties attendant upon its use, and the spec-

ial methods required.
1. PRINCIPLE OF THE PROPOSED WIND TUNNEL.
The main difference between the new type of wind tunnel
sncLthe ones now in operation is the use of a different fluid.
The idea is to diminish the effect of viscosity.

It would not

be surprising if any other fluid were better than air in this
reaped.

However, there does not seen to be such a fluid.

-4-

.

Water, the liquid most easily obtained, has, indeed, a comparatively small viscosity; that is, the ratio of its viscosity to
its density is only the 13th part of the

similar

ratio for air.

The density of water, however, is so great that it is hardly
possible to afffordthe horsepower required to @rce water through
a large tunnel. But, even supposing that such a current of water
Gould be obtained, e.g. by using a natural,waterfall, it would
be @te

impossible to make tests in it.

A model could not be

3

made sufficiently strong to withstand the enormous forces aczting
on it} nor would it be pos~ible to hold the model,stationary.
The same difficulty would be met in using my

other liquid.

As

for gases othez than air, oarbonic acid is the only one which
has a ratio of viscosity to density less than that ofair; but the
difference is so smal

that fitWCUM

not pay to use it.

less expensive to-build a larger wind tunnel than to

It is

(Wn8tZtLC~

me for using carbonic acid gas$ which has to be sealed and requires gasometers and other contrivmces for holding the gas;
and, further, the aiffieulties of qeration would all be inoreased.
The fact that there iS still another way of changing the
fluid, did not occur to any one for many years.

Air may be used;

but, if it is compressed, it becomes a fluid with new propertieq,a fluid which is the best suited for reliable and exact tests on
models.

When air is ocmpressed, its den’sityincreases, but its

viscosity does not.

The increased pressure, it is truej requires

strong w&lls for the tunnel to withstand the pressure and to pre- ,
vent the air frcm expanding; but the increase of effectiveness

“

.

secured for the tests is
neoessary & anges and to
neh

by heavy steel ones.
Before discussing this point we must first convince ourselves

that the inorease of p~essuze gzeatly incxeases the range and

value of wind tunnel.
tests.
11. THE REYNOLDS NUMBER.
We are inolined naturally to compare small objects with large
1
oneS, with the assumptWn that all the uualities are independent
of the size of the object~ and that therefore the effeats will
be corresponding~y smaller or larger,

Coming at once to our prob-

lem, we are disposed to think that useful information for the
desigqw

of a flying maohine may be obtained by observing the

shapes of a butterfly or of vaziOus insects.
the idea underlying tests on models.

In fact, this is

The.absolute size of bod-

ies is, it must be noted, a concept devoid of exaot meaning.
There is no absolute length; the length of any object can only

be oompared with that of another.

Imagine all scales to have

been destroyed, and let us not be conscious
of our own bodies.

of the dimen~ons

Then we would not be able to decide whether

our physical world shculd be caUed a dwarf one or a giant one we would have no basis of comparison. We may therefore reasCnabZy ezpect that a world on a different qoale than ours would
not differ essentially from ours if the same physios3 laws are
valid in both.

.

“

.

-6This does not,mean that all numrioal
same in both.

ratios would be the

It is not necessary that the same physical laws

produoe the same motion of’a fluid, i.e. a geometrically similaz
motion, around two similaz boties.

For the streamlines of a flu-

id around sn immersed solid are not related to its shape by ge~“metrical relations bd by those derived from the laws of mecha.
ios, It is possible, howevez, to derive the ccndition for obtaining such similar motions by extending our general consider*

ations,

withaut using mathematical processes.

We picture two phenomena, independent of eaoh other; in particular we presuppose that no scale is carried from the seat of
one phenomenon to that of the other. We consider separately two
geometrical.lysimilar solids, each immersed in its own fluid, and
endeavor, under these conditions, to see if we .Qendetect any
difference between them.

If we cannot, it would beabsurd!to

expect two different motions;

for

one of the absolute truths, of

which everyone is convinced, is that equal causes have equal
effeots. Rather,

where we mnnot

there is equality.

find a difference, me believe,
.’

The two solids being supposed to be geometriadl-lysimilar,
no difference cam be found between them, since we do not have a
scale. By selectingany particular lengthof

the bOdy, its di-

mensions oen provide US only with a standard length for the investigation of the relation between the body and the spacequalities of the fluid.
For the same reason we oannot detect-any difference between
k

,

.

-7’the densities of the two fluids.

Instead of considering density

a’””theecond standard unit - length bei~g the first - we will oks
T
t ain a more useful one and one to whiti we are more P.ccustonedif we aombine the concepts of volume and of dsnsity, and conside~,
for instanae, the mass.of a cube of ~it

VOl~5

f%lled by the

fluid as our standard unit of mass,
The velocity of the fluid relative to the immersed b~dy and
at a great distance from it may be considered as a third standard
#

unit.
It is essential to realize that it is not possible to find
any relation between these three quantities. Neither do any

‘

two of them mean the same physioal thing, nor can any ‘ho of them
be combined in such a way that the third appears. If, therefore, the qualities mentioned weze sufficient ‘todetermine all
the features of the phenomenon, the flow around similar
wald

bodies

always be similar also; we would not be able to detect my

cliffrence. This is the actual ease if the fluid is non-viscws$
e
and therefoxe motions ar~d

similar bodies immersed in perfeot

fluids are similar.
The viscosity of a fluid is characterized as follows: o~sider a unit cube of the fluid, so chosen that in any plane parallel to one of “itsfaces the fluid has a constant velooity; let
the velocity of the fluid increase uniformly as cne passes from
this face across to the opposite one; then, if this change in
veloaity eqgals the unit of velocity, the foroe of fritiion on
the face of the cube is called the coefficient of viscosity of

.

“8-

.
the fluid.

This appears to be. a ~omplicated concept, sO we shall

try to combine it with the two standard units of length and of
mass, a

that we obtain a velocity chazactesistic of,the viscos-

ity of the fluid, in cmu,biriation
with tke other two qualities.
Let us imagine now a unit cube of the fluid and any difference
of veloaity on the two opposite sides, There is a foroe ~f friction on each suoh face.
wbe
,

If this foroe were to act on a ~it

of the fluid, i.e. on a unit mass, it would produce en accel-

eration, ad

in the course of being moved through a unit distance

this cube would have its velocity increased from O to a definite
value,
We uay imagine the conditions of velocity on the two opposite
faces of the unit cube varied until the force of frictim

is such

that the resulting velocity of the seicondcube ~uals

the differ-

ence in velocity at the two faces of the first abe.

Half this

velooity may be ~alled the I!Reynolds
velocity.!l It is charamcteristio of the viscosity of a fluid whose density is known, the dimensions of a ealid body immersed in it being Mown,
furnish a unit of length.

so as to

It oan be determined for one of the

two phenomena considered without referenoe to the other.
.
Therefoze the ratio of the velocity of a fluid to this Reynolds velocity can be determined without reference to another
phenomenon; it is an absolute number, called the Reynolds Number.
It may be the same in the case of two phenomena, or it may be different.

If it is not the same, here is an essential

difference

between the phenomena,which may be observed and stated; and it
would be most remarkable if, in spite of this difference, the

“

-s?-

.

fluids ~ho~~ have the s~e

mot~ Ons;

it would in fact be im&os-

sible. But if, on the other hand, the two numbers are equal,
we describe the motions of the two fluids as identical, taking
viscosity into account, too. We may seek other differences; if
.
there are none, i~ would be absurd to expect different motions.
Before extending our generd. considerate
ions, we shall e=

press the Reynolds Nuriber terms of the quantitiesordinarily
in
‘used. Let p be the density of the fluid;v be the coefficient
of viscosity; B

be the characteristic length of the immersed.

solid. The mass of a cube of the fluid of length

B

on eaoh

edge is B3p; the force of friotion on a face of area Bz

is

V BVI, when VI is the differenos of veloaity at the two oPPosite
faoes; the work performed by this force if aoting through adist~ce

B

is K B2VL,

which equals the kinetic energy gained by

the (second) oube of mass p Ba - i.ea *p

B=VL?

Hence$ if

V1 =V 2
~&v

Jp#v12

1

or VI = ~~~
~B

&l
The Reynolds velocity is one-half of this, i.es VR=PE.
T7r ting
i

V

for the velocity of the fluid at a great distance from

the solid, we have, by definition, the F@ynolds Number = ~ = ‘B
E
‘R
If this has%he same v~ue in two phenomena of flow, they are alike
in all respects. This may be called the Reynolds Lam.
111. DEDUCTIONS FROM THE REYNOLDS LAW.
In

the

preoeding section an attempt ha~een

the expression for the Reynolds Law h
possible.

made to derive

as elementarya rnmer

&ly by knowing the basis of the law can one gra6p

-1o-

.
cmple%e

meaing

and obtain the absolute confidence in it whi&

is reqpired fox one to apply it safely. A mathematical.
proof
was not given although it would have been shorter, fbr it would
,

at the same time have been poorer of content,
We considered only the viscosity of the air,

and did not

discuss the otlnerdifferences which exist bet,veenthe tests on
models and those
.

on full-sized objects.

The next step is to in-

vestigate whether these differences do.not introduce such errors
that it would not be worth while simply to get rid of a possible
error due to viscosity.

Before doing this we nust consi,der
the

deductions from the Reynolds Law so far as wind tunnel tests ,are
concerned.
Let the span of the wing of a model be 3 ft., and the air
velocity be &) mi/hr. (= 88 ~

). The kinernatioal
viscosity of

air at O°C and normal pressure ~S 0.001433, i.e. shout *

fi:~

Hence the Reynolds Number, regarding the span as the characteristic length is
3 ft. x 88 ft/sec. = 185 ~Oo
$
f~,2
1
m
X87.

,

That is, the velocity of the air in the tunnel would be al-most
two hundred thousand times the velocity oal+ed the Reynolds velocity.

The full-sized airplane may have a span tentimes

as

great, and the veloaity of flight may be 1 1/2 times as great;
so that its Reynolds Number is
10 x 1.5 X 185,000= 2,775,000.

.

-3.1.

The magnitude of these numbers is surprising. The vQuosity of the air is so small th~

in the neighborhood of the wings

of’an airplane the velocities p~cducedby

the foroes of friction

are only about three millionth of the velocity of flight. Equation (1) shows that the kinetic energy is proportional to the
s~are

of the veloczity,while the work perfommd by the fric&ion-

al force is proportional to the velotity.

Hence the work p~r-

formed,by the frictional force is aninute

fraction of the kinet-

~ ic energy$

in the model test referred to ~d

2, 7%,000
in the case of the airplane. It seems surprising that any effect
Igoco

of friction can be detected, since it increases or deoreases the
kinetio energy by such a aall

fraction.

However, in the alculation of the Reynolds Number one quantity is chosem arbitrarily. ~

arbitrary length occurs in the

formula, and the magnitude of the nudber depends upon the choice
of this length.

Indeed, within a range of a dimension like the

but the
span of wings, the viscosity has almost no irrfluenoe,
i3ms31e the range considered, the greater is the effed
r

of vis-

Cosity, provided there are in this range the sane differences
of welodties

as in the other.

It must be noted thti greet dif-

ferences of velocity occur within very small rmges.
surface of the wing velocities almost zero

Near the

occur close to velo~

ities of the magnitude of the velocity of flight. The &axacier
of the motion depends upon the stability of flow near the surfaces, and therefore upon ph~omena
these

within small rangeS.

Within

the Reynolds Number and the rat10 of the aocelerati n to
o

the v.i=cosi~ is less than the number commonly used for comparison.
.

.

-12q

In any case, tests &how that there are considerable ciifferences of motion at the Reynolds Numbers of the test and the flight
There is even instability, changing the oharacter of the motion
neax the largest airships, on’increasing tts ~elocity~ when f~y-

.

ing at normal velocities.*
These facts are not contradictions of the Reynolds Law, but,
on the contrary, are in agreement with it.

~

The surprising fact

that,even when the Reynolds Number is large, its influenoe is
considerable, does not furnish the least reason for doubting the
correctness of a law based upon such elementary considerations
Doubts about the Reynolds Law are based upon a different
fact.

In qite of the convin~ing proof, it happens that model

tests at the same Reynolds Number sometimes give quite different
results. Now the Reynolds Law does not mean that at the same
Reynolds Number only one particular motion of the air Is possibleIt states that there is no difference between two phenomena with
the same number.

It may be that two or more motions are possi-

ble, but then they are possible in any case of the same Reynolds
Number.
There must be some reason, however, why the one or t-heother
motion ocours. The reascms may be different.

Sometimesth.ere
is

a kind of hysteresis, the fluid remembers, as it were, what happened before this particular motion began; and the motion is differerit,for instance, if the angle of attaak was larger or smaller
immediately before.

If

SUOh

a phenomenon occurs with the full-

size&body, it can be investigated a model test at the same
by
* A publication of these tests is in preparation

-

.
.

-13-

.

.

Reynolds Number,

Sometimes there is no such hysteresis, but the

motion is very sensitive and is oh~ged by the least change of
the shape of the body, or of the smoothness of its surface or
with a ohange of the turbulence of the air.

In sudI cases the

motion around the full-sized body will be sensitive at the ssme
Reynolds Number as in the mode3.tests.

In this case it SW5.11
be

diffioult to obtain the e.xaotshape of the model and the right
smoothness of its surfaoe in order to have the ssme motion.

At

the same time other differences between the model test sndr.
the
aatual flight will produce differences in the results; but in
such cases it is very doubtful whether two airplanes which are
apparentIy identical have the same qualities. There do= not exist a definite motion around the body at that particular Reynolds
I?umbe.
r

The careful investigator will observe this fact.

Then

the ~odel test has shown all there is t o be shown, and theimethod
is not to be blamed for revealing phenomena which

are

surprising

to the designer but true nevertheless.
IV. ERRORS DUE TO C71HERCAUSES.
There are still othe~ differences between the tests on mod.
els and in actual flight, which will cause errors. It is necessazy to rea~ize that these, other than the one due to viscosity,
do not affect seriously the value of the results of tiletests.
The new type of wind tunnel may, then, be expected to give reliable results.
The best evidence of the insignific~oe of these errors due
to

other oauses is obtainedby comparingtests made in different

I

-14.

wind tunnels.

It may be stated that there is found a certain

agreement, but only with the same value of the Reynolds N~b~r

q

Reynolds himself deduoed theLaw oalled by his name froz experiments trponwater flowing through pipes.

In the two wind twa-

nels at G&ttingen vezy careful investigations were made on acrcfoils, over a large range of Reynolds Numbers, and under very
different conditione. Most resuits at the same Reynolds Number
.

agree well; even the results which cannot be plotted on a ourve
against the Reynolds Wmber

appear mu~

more regular when so

plotted than when plotted in any other way.

The results of

these tests show that ”full-sized tests are much better th&n model.ones, and provide the designer with clear, reliable and useful information. It is not suffi~ient, however, to oompare the
results of several tests.in a perfun~tom m=aer;

care W+

be

taken.
The G~ttingen tests were not made under conditions geometrically similar; the two tunnels are not equ~ly

go~-

There

are many tunnels vhiQh have more turbulencethan is necessary,
the designer having only taken care
ty

q

to obtain a uniform velooi-

The older wind tunnel at G8ttingen was exceedingly turbu-

lent.

The surfaces of the models were different purposely.

Only the results obtained in good wind tunnels should be compared,
the model having a proper surface,snd the test being thoroughly

laid out with referenceto its influenoe. Then the differences
would be smsller,and the reliabilityand usefulness of tests at
the full-sized Reynolds Nmbe r would appear more distincily.

-15-

The matter may be considered slso from another point of
view.

The tests show that under particular ccmditions the ~ea.~its

of different tests agree very well; in certain cases onlv fisqood
agreement lacking.
e~ected

to agree.

tions whioh h

NOW it is not ewident that the results may k“+
It may be

and is very probable that the ms~

not agree with eaoh other are swh

sensitive me..

tions as were desc~sbed in the previous section. of Couz’se‘t:ll
F

sensitivenessappears exaggerated. f the differencesin the test .
i
.

conditions are.
Theoretical reasons are not wanting, however, a~o
character of the motim

whY the

depends almost exclusively on the ratio

of the velocity of air to the Reynolds veloaity, ad

not upon

other ratios$ e.g. the ratio of the Reynolds velocity to the velocity of,sound in the me’dium,the’latter being oharaoteristia of
its compressibility. It is not at all sufficient to state that
this ratio is small, the Reynolds Number (or its inverse) being
small too.

But the ratio of velo~ity to the velocity of sound

has only one meaning; there is no arbitrary Quantity used in forming it - such as B in theReynol&s Number.

Tt doe~ot

matter

whether this ratio is calculatedfor a wide range or for
one.

The:e

a small

is no discontinuity if the range or the compressi-

bility passes to zero.

In this ease the fluid acts, with respect

to its compressibility, like a perfect fluid.

If the ratio of the

velocity of flight to the velootty of scund is small, there is no
physical reascn for ex.peotinga large influenoe.

So mu~

the less

is the influence of a difference of compressibility in the tests
on the model and in flight.

Stated mathematie~ ly, any m efftc-

-16-

ient is a fumti on of the twc ratios; hut, when both are small,
the function is continuous with zespect to the one and irregular
with respect to the Reynolds Number.
The same deduction is valid for the other errors; whether
the muse be,the contrivance used for supporting the model, the
turbulence of the air, the variation of pressure or of velooity,
or the finite distance of the walls of the tunnel or the boundaries of the ourrent of air, the error is small provided the
.

cause is. Their influence oan be made as small as is necessary
and customary in any technicsl test.

Not only is the error

small, it is regular, it can be compensated for, and it.does.not
impair the comparison of different tests, as would the”e+ror due
to visoosity.
V. T~

DIMENSIONS OF A GOMPl%ISSEDAIR WIND TUNNEL.

In a tunnel filled with compressed air it is possible ‘toobtain a Reynolds Number much larger than in the tunnels

now in use-

But the range is limited in several respects, and its features
must harmonize with each other in order to secure good results

and also a low cost of operation.
The size of the tunnel is limitedby the size of the models, “
It is not possible to make correctly shaped models if they are
too small. The velocity of flow, on the other hsnd, must not be
too great, lest the contrivances for supporting the model beocme
so large that they disturb the motion.

The stresses in the modeZ

must also be considered. This oondition “isduly respected if the
dynamical pressure of,the air does not exceed a particular value.
.,

.

-17-

,
Hence

velocity

tile

must be the ~naller, the greatet the density.

This is desirable also with respect to the power required, to the
increase of temperature produoed, and to the dimensions of the
fan and its shaft. The designer nust also bonsider the time required to fill the tunnel with a compressor of proper dimensions.
The pressure is limited only by ~estions
Let
placed,
.

D
V

pressure.

be the diaeter

of construdion.

of the section where the model is

be the velocity of the air and

P

be the maximum

Then
RaDVp
P a D2~P

Reynolds Number
Power required

Heat prodticedper unit of surface a V3P
IlynamicQ pressure
qa V2P
Weight of tunnel walls
a IPP
H D3p1.2s
Energy reqgired to fill tunnel
Shaft diameter/diameter of tunnel a V PI/3
{velocity of circumference of fan constant}
The designez, in the first place, mu~
pxessure he can ~rmit

choose the dynamic~

without the supports of the model intro-

ducing too great an error. Then he may calculate the pressure
needed for the Reynolds Number desired, S@
he considers pzoper.

the smallest ‘diameter

If he seleots too high a pressure, the di-

ameter must be made greater. Generally this will increase both
the cost of operation and other difficulties. The Reynolds
Number and the dynamical pressure being given, the diameter and
the velocity’may be expressed as funutions of the pressure.
IfR=

aDVP)

[v
)

and q =b~P
where

a, b, A and B

)

then
(D
are constant coefficients, Substitutions

.
“

-18-

may then be made in the expressions for the different qusntities.

It appears:
Power absorbed
Heat p~oduced per unit of surface
Weight of tunnel walls
Energy required to fill tunnel
“
8haft diameter/d&meter of tunnel

!$
u
a
a
a

p-3/z
p-1/2
p-I/2
P-l/4
p-L/6

That is to say, all the quantities mentioned are more favor~le
.

the higher the pressure. This advant~e must be compared

with the difficulty of construction in consequence of high pressure, and the disadvantage of a smdle~ die.,metez.A theoretital.

.
limit for the pressure is the critical point where the air ceases
to be a ~!perfect
gas.!] In the neighborhood of this point the viscosity inoreases and therefore it is of no advantage to increase
the pressure; but reason of construction would prevent this point
being reaohed. The oritical point of oarbonic acid gas is, however, muoh lower, especially if it is cooled.
We cannot close this chapter without considering the most
interesting question, whether it would be possible to build a
wind tunnel for tests of models of airships, having a Remolds
Number equa3.to flight conditions. Let the length of the actual
ship be 655 ft., zd

its velocity be 95 mi/hr.

In a tunnel de-

signed for tests of ship models only, the dynamicsl pressure could
The pressure could be 100 atmospheres
be increased to 2000 ~
ft.2
TQeq the velocity would have to be just 95 mi/hr.,
(200,000*).
.
1 : 100;
.
and happens to be ‘rfull-sized.~ The scale wouldbe
the diameter aould be 2 ft., and the power about 1000 HP.
think this tunnel emuld be made.
formation long desired.

We

It would give the designer in-

.

-- 19-

The results of tests in a compressed air wind tunnel would
be applied in the same way as is the praotice with existing
tunnels.

The tunnel WCUH

give the ordinary coefficients,and

the right ones, The Reynolds Number could be calculated from
the observed temperature and pressure.
The results would be, first of en,
.
i

for the information of

.
the designer of aircraft, giving him the true values of the cc- ‘
effioient required for any problem.

The tunnel could also be

“

,.

used with advantage for scientific investigations. The differences in the Reynolds Numbers which could be realized in suoh a’
tunnel are much greater than can be obtained in existing tlulnels.
At the same time, the pressures and the forces on the model vary
only as the Reynolds Number,.if the same model is used, ’whereas
in etisting tunnels they vary as the square of this number.
.
,.

.,

.

.

..

.“

‘.

