REPORT

NO.

26

THE VARIATION OF YAWING MOMENT DUE TO ROLLING
I

By hWIN

BIDWBLL~I1801i’

Contribution, 1919, No. 1, from the Rogers Laboratory of Physics Msssschnsetts

PREVIOUS

Institute of Technology.

WORK

The aerodynamical constants of an airphme necessary for the discnwion of stability are
partly observed and partly calculated. Among the calculated coefficients is A?fl,which is the
variation of yawing moment due ta rolling. In the Technical Report of the Advisory Commit tee for Aeronautics (London), 1912-13, Itkporte and Memoranda No. 77, being an Investigation into the Stability of an Aeroplane, etc., by L. Bairstow and others, on page 157 it is stated
that “for the wings it wi!l be seen that whilst Lp is proportional to the slope of the lift curve,
[P is proportional ta the slope of the drag curve. Hence NP will be one-tenth of Lp d anglcs
shghtly above that giving maximum lift/drag, and may become zero, or evan slightly negative,
in a machine flying at about the angle of minimum drag. The effect of the rudder and body will
be appreciable in most machinas. N’ wilI be variable between the limite O and 40.”
In a contribution on “Dynamical stabiLity of aeroplanes,” by Jerome C. Hunmker,
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections (Washington), vol. 62, No. 5, June, 1916, pagw 55-57,
the calculation of NP is carried out in detail along the lines laid down in the above quotation
and vahnw for the machine under discussion (a d@gu by Capt. V. E. Clark, United States
Army) run from O to 57.
An essential argument in these derivations of a vahe for .VPis that the roll produces an
increased line of attack on an ele~kry
area of the right wing and a diminished angle of
attack on the corresponding element of the left wing; and that, consequently, the variation of
the yawing moment should be calculated from the slope of the drag curve. Now, as a matter of
fact, this would be certainly correct @ case the wing were a flat plane to which the resultant
pressure remained always normal, independently of the angle of attack; but it is by no means
certain that the argument is valid in the case of cambered wings, where a &ange in the angle
of attack produces a change in tie direction of the resultant force as well as a change in its
magnitude. It would seem to be more likely to be correct to take account of the change in
direction of the resultant force, as is the case in the calculation of XW, the variation in the X
force due to vertical velocity. In the case of the flat plane X. is a negative quantity,
owing to the diminution of the redtant pressure (ite direction remaining invariant) when the
angle of attack is diminished; but the change in direction of the resultant force on the cambered
wing is so much more important than the diminution in its magnitude (owing to the large value
of the Iift reIative to the dreg) that the value of X= for the airplane beconws actually positive
instead of negative.
A NEW

CALCULATION

It would seem that in calculating N. the change in the X force (not in drag alone) should
be used. It would be possible to make the calculation on this basis in the following manner:
Let dy be an eIement of length along tlm wing, and S its span. If m is the mass of the
airplane in skqgs,mXWw is the variation in the actual X force, due to w; and for the ekment dy
79

..

..-—
-.-—
...==
—
--.

.—

.-. —

80

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMZM!EE FOR AERONAUTICS.

The moment of this change is the change itself
the proportional part would be mX.wdy/S.
multiplied by ite mm y, viz., mXWwydy/S; and the total value of the variation in the moment

s

+19p

mNPp== _tnnXuu@y/8.
The value of w is negative, and equal to –yp.

On substituting this value, we have

s

+9/’2

Np=

– Xwywyfs -.–XJ’712.
-m

When the vaIues for the Clark design
are found:
u - –112.6
.
.
0°
;.=+
.366
Np = – 47.5

are substituted, in which S -40,
– 78.2
30

– 65.3
&

+ .249
–33.2

+ .245
–32.7

the following results

– 54
12”
0

o

whereas, according to Hunsaker, the values of NP are
+33.5

ivp=o

+ 57.0

It will be observed that NP by this calculation is negative, instead of positive, and that the
numerical vahs are large for small angles of attack, small for huge angles. Not only the sign
of iVPis changed, but the general trend of numerical values is reversed.
EFFECTON STABIIJTY
Fortunately the value of NP is not of very serious moment in the discussion of stability.
The exprcwion in which it is most important is the approximate form of the damping in the
type of motion which Hunsaker (lot. cit., p. 71) calls the Dutch roll, and which corresponds to
the quadratic factor of the biquadratic that governs the lataral motion, namely:

“+(w”+d%zr’o”
2-2”%($-3
The value of ~ ti negative. That of No is also negative, and those of Lo and ~ are positive.
If, therefore, NP be positive, m found by Bairstow and Hunsaker, the expression in the parenthesis is the differenm of two quantities; and in order to insure stabili~, it is necessary that this
diilerence be positive-that is, we must have NJ L. greatm numerically than NJ Lp. NOW, M
and LOoccur in the expression which determines spiral stability or instability, and the ratio N./ Lois desired small for spiral stability, whereas it is d&red large for stability in tho Dutch
roll. Thus, there arises the necessity for a very fine compromise in the relative magnitudes of
No, L,,Np,Lp,inorder that the machine may be stable both spirally and in the Dutch roll.
If, however, the vah of NP be negative, as is indicated by my calculation above, both
–
are
terms in the parenthesis (Np/Lp Ng/LO) positive for most attitudes of flight which have
been examined, and the machine is stable in the Dutch roll without the necessity for any fine
adjustmeniuas compared with the spiral case. This should be a matter of some relief to the
conscientious designer critical of the dynamic stability of his design.
CHECK ON THE CALCULATION

In so far as my argument for the calculation of NPis just, a similar argument could be given
of
for obtaining a calculated value of Lp interms 2., with the result:
~ =zJY/EL

.—

VARIATION OF YAWING MOM13N’J!

The values of ~ as calcul~ted by this formula would be:

u = – 112.5 – 78.2 – 65.3 – 64.0
~o

(jO
12°
3°
ZU= – 5.62 - 3.77 – 2.92 – LO
-133
LP= –749
– 493
-389

i==

—

whereas the values given by Hunsaker are

LP= –631

–224

–319

The values of& are obtained rather easily by measuring the damping of the modeI when
oscillating about the X axis, and, consequently, the measured values should be fairly trustworthy. The only two cases in the table in which a comparison can fairly be made are those
in the fit and last cohmms cmresponding to highest and lowest speeds; for the integer in the
third cohunn is not an experimental value, but one obtained by interpolation. At the highest
nearly 20 per cent too high; whereas at the lowest speed it is
speed the calculated value of Lp is
.
distinctly tOO IOW.
It would not be surprising if a calculated value based on 2. should be b high, for the
experimental method of determining Zu is to compare the Z forces for the model when set at
different angles of pitch relative to the fixed direction of the air current. Now, it is a common
observation in our wind tunnel at the ?d.assachusett.sInstitute of ?J3cbnology that when the
orientation of the model relative to the wind is quickly changed, a very considerable time elapse-s
It appears as though it took a reasonable amount of
before the forces reach their shady vahe.
time for the stretun lines in the fluid to change from one steady direction b another.
If this be so, it would be impossible for the stream lines ta accommodate themselves to
the oscillatory motion in the experimental determination of LP = fully as they accomm odate
themselves to the changed orientation in the experimental determination of Zti. The result
would be that the effective value of Zu, which should be used in the calculation of LP, might
be a considerable amount below the measured vahe of Z.. No such explanation could be
given for the discrepancy between “tie values as calculated and observed of LP at the lowest
speed, for the direction of the change is reversed. There is, howem3r, the possibility that the
value of 2. as calculated from the experiments should be considerably in error, because this
value must be obtained either by an interpolation in a table of values, or by estimating the
slope of an experhnentally determined curve, and either of thsse procawes is one in which it is
difEcult ,to obtain accuracy, because the experimental errors or an error of judgment in fairii
a curve are extremely effective in vitiating the value obtained for the rate of change of the
ordinate in the vicinity of any particular pornt on the curve.
A comparison maybe made for the C?urtissJ. N. 2., from Hunsaker’s data (loo. cit., p. 78)
and these reports, First Annual Report, 1915, pp. 47-49:
U
–115.5
– 63.8

i
1°
150.5

Zu
–3. 95
–.673
8

LP(obs.)
–314
– 78

Lp(calc.)

–427
– 73

Zu

.162
–. 292

NP(new)
–17.2
+31. 5

-.

;..=—

—.—

—
-

—

-.
.-

NP(old)
O
+37. 7

Here the calculated LP at low speed checks vary well with that observed, but is again considerably too high at high speeds. The reversal of sign of X. for this machine has brought the
two vahms of iVPfor low speed near together.
EXPERIMENTAL

CHECK

In the British report (1912-13), Reports and Memoranda No. 78, being the Experimental
Determination of Rotary Coef6cients, by L. Bairstow, etc., on pages 177-179 there is outlined
an experimental method of measuring the value of Lr, the vmiation of the rolling moment due
to yawing by a somewhat intricate experimental procedure, based on the theory of forced
oscillations In a similar manner, the variation of yawing moment due to rolling, N.., could
1670S0-S.

Doe.807,
65-S.-.6

..—

82

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISOEY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

be determined. It seems, however, that the measurement of the amplitude of the forced oscillation would determine on.Iy the numerical magnitude, and not the sign of L, or NP ss the cme
might be; and that for the experimental determimtion of the sign it will be necessary to
observe the phsse difference between the forced oscillation and the periodic applied force.
This should not be a difficuIt thing to observe, but it is quite possible that if one knew, or
thought he knew, in advance what the sign of the result should be, he might overlook the
mattar of checking the sign by an observation on the phase difference of the two motions.
It is probable that before any great dependence can be put upon the calculated value of
NP or similar aerodynamic coefficients, an extended comparison of calculated values with
experimentally determined ones will be necwssry; and I have not offered the above discussion so much for the purpose of attempting a definitive determination of the value of Np w for
the purpose of finding out the po=ibility of making a calculation which would seem to be just
as reasonable if not more reasonable than those before given; and which does, as a matter of
fact, lead to a value of iVPof negative sign instead of one with a positive sign. The hportant
thing for the discussion of stability is not so much the numerical value of N@, unless NP be
positive, as the assurance that NP is negative, if, indeed, it be negative,—(lihtmct jmm lectureg

given d t?k?ihwadbuwtta hditde of Technologyto a specialcwr8e
fw Amy and i4awy ojkeT8, May to Septender, 1918.)

in

aeronwticd

en@eering

NoTE.-h a hok on Aeronautic by Oowley andLevy, which has just come to Imnd, there is foundon page 201
a table in which the value of NP (in a notation different from that of Baixatow and IIuneaker) iE negative; but the
detsfls of the calculation which lead to the value are not given, m that it can not be determined whether or not the
negative value is intinded or fs a typographical error.

