!
/
TEC~~ICAL

NOTES .

NA'J'!UlnL .AJ)VI 30RY CO~£V1I TrIEE I'OR AEHC'NA
UTICS .

NAtA -T,v'-;,,/

Nc. 27

By

S. W. Sparr ow,
.A'.ltom0ii ve Power Plan ts Secti o n,
BUREAU OF STA-Wt..RDS .

December,

1920.

PROOUCI Of :

NATIONAL TECHNICAL
INFORMATION SERVICE
u.s. DEPART M
ENT

Of CO MM ERCE
SPRINGf iEl D VA. 11161
.

~~

NOTIe E
THIS DOCUMENT

HAS BEEN REPRODUCED

FROM THE BEST

COpy FURNISHED

THE

SPONSORING AGENCY.

IS RECOGNIZED THAT
ARE ILLEGIBLE,
IN THE INTEREST

US BY

ALTHOUGH IT

CERTAIN PORTIONS

IT IS BEING RELEASED
OF MAKING AVAILABLE

AS MUCH INFORMATION AS POSSIBLE.

-~---

- . ~ .~

--.-- - - . ~

NATIONAL AbVfSORY COMMJTTEE FOR AERONAUTICS
TECHNICAL

NOTE NO. 27.

INSTRTJvlEN'f FOR M
EASURING ENGINE CLEARANCE VOLUMES.

By
S, W. Spa.rrow
Automotive Power Plants Section,
BURE.AU OF STAND.ARDS.

The following Technical Note on an Instrument for Weasu~ing
Engine Clearance Volumes was designed and constructed Ullder the
direction of the Automotive Power Plants Section of the Bureau of
Standards, ~~d submitted for publication through the Subcmrunittee
on Powor Plants for Aix-craft of the Na·tional Adviso;;:-y Ccmmi ttee for
Aeronautics.
A few years ago, when the gasoline engine with v8~tical cylinders was the well-nigh universal type, a description of appaA'atu6
to measure clearance volume would have aroused little interest.
In
the highest part of such cylinders there was usually located either
a valve or a spark plug through the opening for which liqu5.d could
be poured.. The volume of liquid l'cquired to fill completely the combustion space wi th the piston at uppel' dead center served a.s the
clearance measurement. To be sure, it was a rather messy procedure
requir:i.ng conside:t'able t5.me to remove the liqUid when check read.ings
were desired, but otherwise was fairly satisfactor.y. With the advent of tee v type enginG, th~ problem ceased to be simple, Frequently it was almost impossibJ.e to make this me asu.~ement with the engine
mounted for test', as all openings were then below the highest point
in the cylinder.
In the summer of 1919, Major Norman of the English Royal Aircraft Establishment ~t Farnborough suggested making this measurement
by a process which consi sted essentially of simu.1 taneously cha.nging
both a known and an unknown volume of gas by a known amouu.t and then
calculating the magnit.ude of the unknown from the resulting difference in pressure between the two, To Dr.. Dickinson, who was in Europe
stud.ying aviation development, the idea mad.e 5.pstant appel:l.l and on
his return to the Bureau of Standards he started the construction of
an instrument based on this principl e. In the first instrument, Fig.
1, no I:I.ttempt was made at refinement in constructional details as it
was belieVed that, onCe the instrument was proved practical, its use
would suggest such changes as would make for greater accuracy and
convenience of operatton. In the development of the present design,
Fig. 2, Mr. C. W. Elliot bas incorporated many such change~ but in
all major features the instrument is the same as the original built
by w~. A. R. Long, to whom much of the credit for its success is due.

- 2 -

'\

The principle of tLe apparatus i~ showa in Fig. ~ . If the volUlDes A and B a.r.a each decr&aaed the same amount by the mov's ent of
the pistons, there wil) be a pressure increase in each cylinder,
the greater increase oG~urring in the smaller volume. The pres~ure
difference will be indicated by the difference in liq~~d level 1n the
U tube cOIDlect5.ng the two cylinders. In practice, VO).l.l1.le a, the
clea.-:-ance 701UID6, is alwa.ys un"k'.aown, while ,the oths).', Volume b,
can be alter.ed by moviug piston c, Fig. 5, in or out of the med8Ul'ing ~llnder ~d its magoi tude read frem the scala on the pistOD stOOl.
Th:l.s calibrated vol-UIlle is cha.ng'3d uotil the mov6llle:a.t of the two comp~~on pistons produces the sama ~~eSSt~e inc~eese
in bvth oylinders as indicated by the Hquid in the U t,ubs !'ema:l.ning level. Both
volwes axe then equQl. Tbe above sta.tements hold. true only if both
cylilldere are air-tight or if both lea~ at the same rate. Since the
eugine cylinder is never strictly tight, an adjustabJ.e opemoe is
provided to permit an equal X'ate of leakage from the COt:lpS):ison cylinder. For clearness, the simultaueous volume changes are described
as taktng place in the cloarauce aud measut'5.11g volumes, wherea.s actually there a1:'6 a1lJi:iliary VOJ.umSB d 1 and d 2 • connected wHih these in
whioh the actual change js ads, so that it is (clearance volume +
auxiliary volume d 1 ) and (meas'uring volume + a.uxiliary volume d 2 ) that
are cbanged. T'lle addi tion of these auxiliary volumes s5.mplifies the
appara.tus for making the volume changes and inasmuch as both a.re equal,
does not al tel' the relations described above.
The actual instrument is shown in diagram in Fig. 6, in section
in Fig. 3, and in the photograph, Fig. 2. For' produ.dng the coovges
in volumes the pistons, shown in the schematic drawing, have been
replaced by the cylindrical copper bellows, A. Changes in the comparison volune are produced by tUl:'ning hand wheeJ. C, the mot:i.on be5.ng
transmitted to the piston B through a gear and rack. A vernier &nd
graduated scale on the piston stem penoi t the direct read:tng of volumes up to 48 cubic inches in steps of one-tenth of e, cubic inch.
Should it ever be necessary to measure lal:'ger volumee, an ~uxil~~y
cylinder can be cOtlIlected to Tee, D, now closed by a pipe plug. The
measur9lDen~ would then be made as before except that to the reading
o~ the piston stem should be added the volume of the auxili~~y cylinder,. Tank E is a check vo.11.106 of 7 cubic inches, used only for calibra.t~on purposes. When the tubing is renewed, fitting F is screwed
into the tank, screw G loosened, and verni~ H adjusted to read exactly 7.
I

Me a. sur ing clear ancs volumes consi sts of three dis tinct steps:
L

Measuring tUe rate of leakage from the engi~e cylinder.

2.

l'iaking the rate of leakage from the comp~·;.son vol1me eq'ual
to that from the engine cylinder.

3.

Eq~lizing the comparison vol~e with tee clear.ance volume.

In measuring the rate cf leakage from the engine cylinder, after
baving latched cove~ plate N, needle valve J is opened, leaving the

/

,.,

- 3 right side of the U tube open to the atmosphere. Lever K is t hen
pulled back until a conside-rable pressure difference j.s producod.
The leakage rate is estimated by noting the approxima~e time required
for the pressl~e to deer.ease a definite amount. Val~e L iB next
opened and J closed, one side of the U tube now being open to the atmosphere and the other connected to the comparison ~o)\we. Valve M
is then adjnsted 1..ln-r.U the leakage rate is appi~ox.;.ma ·l;ely t,he same as
that f:('c:o:l the e:ng:i.ne cylind.er.
In equaJ.izing the volumes, valves J and L .:ue both closed, the
left leg of the U tube then being conne cted to the engine r:yHnde~
and the right leg to the measuring cylinder. When chang;; ng the volumes by means of lever K, it is most convenient to watch but one leg
of the tub~. If the left leg be the one chosen and the initial
movement of the liquid is downward, i t indi0a'te~ the pr"3ssure in the
engine cylinder to be the greater and its volume to he the smaller.
After relieving the p~essure on both sides by raising cover plate N,
the volume in the measuring cylinder should be decreased. The cover
plate is again lowered and secured tightly with latCh 0 and the process repeated. The correGt vol1.IDle is that wi th which there is no
change in liqui~ level noted at the fil'St appHcation of the pressure.
It will frequently be found that with the volumes well equalized,
after the pressure has been maintained for a second or two, the defle cti on of the liquid in the U tube will J.nc:'C'ease, showing that the
leakage rates have not been perfectly bala!lced. A few trials w:U.l
readily c onvince the operator that i t is the initial movement that
should be considered in adjusting the ccrnpari son volune and that extreme care in balancing leakage is unnecessary. The explanatioll
will be evident from a conSideration of the effect of a dHference as
large as 10% in the leakage rate from the two volumes. For this pm'pose, let the rate be assUDed as .03 cubic inches per second, a rather
hIgh value for the small pressure increase produced wi 'j;h this instrument. With the above as s'llIlpti on , a measurement taken at t~he end of
one secon~ will be in error by the difference in the amounts that
have leaked from the two volumes, namely, .03 - .9 (.03) ~ .003 cubic
inChes. The sensitivj. ty of the instrument, however, is about 1%, a
diff er ence be tween the ccmpar i son volume and the measu'ced volume of .
this amount being required to produce a readable deflection on the
manometer. The. C03 cub:i.c inch
error will therefore be too sma,ll
to be noticed in measuring volumes of the ma.gnitude of engine clearance spaces. The initial manometer deflection observed can therefore
be attributed entirely to the difference in the magni tude of the two
volumes.
In using this apparatus, care must be taken to prevent temperature changes in ei ther volume as a change of 3 degrees C will change
the deflection a noticeable amount and hence vitiate the result. ObViously, such measurements should never be attempted in:roediately aftexoperating the engine, before it has cU61ed to normal temperature.

- 4 -

To attempt precise measuremeuts of a clearance volume without
nrst carefully setting the pistCJu a.t dead center would be utter folly.
Mark:Lngs on flywheel. or propeller hub make this a matter of comparB.t5.ve ease in the maj ori ty of cases. In the absenc8 of s1.1ch ma1.'k:i.ngs,
the clearance measuring apparatus may be connected as wae. done f o~
measuring leakage with v:11ve J opeu and L closed.. Thf.s merely e115.bles
the U tube on t h e inst~~waut to be used to measure the d~ff~rencp- between the pressu:t'e :i.n the cyliT.lder and the atmos.p here. Moving the
p1.ston toward upper dood center produces p!'essure; moving j.t awa.y,
suction. In the Liberty 1112" oue deg..'ee mo',; ion o£ the c;rar.k irorl ddad
center can be detected wHh this ius ti."1..1meDt .

In every branch of internal combustion engineer~.ng there is an
insistent danand for grea.ter economy in ope~~a;i;i on and t here i~ at
present a decided trend toward increased ccmp:r.ess~. on ra~ios a s a mean.s
of meeting this demand, With the higher compression ratio the wergin
betv
veen normal ope:r:-ation ami preigni tion is reciuc·ed and the m8J:.'luff'.cturer must exercise greater care in maintaining clea.r.a nce volumes
within close limits. To acc.cmpJish this, 81.1.i table measuz'ing appa ra.tus will be required and it is in accorda.nce wi th a. policy of a.ntic~.­
pating the needs of the industry that the instrument describeQ atove has
been p!'epared.

•

-s--

Ji --

//6URE

/.

_

_

___

__

__J_

_ _ _ -'

