AERONAUTICS
,

SIXTHANNUAL REPORT’
OF THE

NATIONALADVISORYCommittee
FOR AERONAUTICS
1920

INCHJDLNG

TECENCM.L
L~OS. 83

REPORT’S

to 110

WASHIX-GTOY
GOVERF.MEWI
PRINTINGOFFICE
1921

.

ADDITIOI$AL
COPIES
OF TKH PUBLICATIONAY BE PROCU7ED FROM
M
THE SH’ERLYTENDENT DOCUMENTS
OF
G07ERXMENT PRA-TING--OT’IZCE
WASHDIGTON,
D.C.
.L’T
PER COPY
S1.50

IJITTER

OF TRANSMITTAL.

h’ATIOXAL ~DVISOEY

CoxxrmmE

lFas7t;ngfon,

FOR &ROh”AUTICS,

.—

D. (7., X’owem.be? .t?o, 19’20.

The PmwmENT:
In compliance with the provisions of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1915 (naval
appropriation
Wtj Public, No. 273; 63cI Cong. ), 1 have the honor to transmit herewith the
Sixth Annual Report. of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronauts,
including a statement of its expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30? 1920.
‘ In addition to the exercise of its prescribed functions in the fieki of scientific research in
aeronautics: the 3Tational Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics has, cluring the past year,
given special consideration to the question of organization of governmental activities in aeronautics, and has effected a coordination of views on this subject betmeen the military .md
naval air services and other go-rernmentaI agencies concerned. The agreements reached ha-re
been given defite
expression in a dr.af t of legklation pro-riding for the establishment of a
Bureau of Aeronautics in the Department
of Commerce for the regulation and encourageI.n this connection attention is invited to that section of
ment of commercial air navigation.
the report entitled ‘( Organization of Go~-ernmenttil Activities in Aeronautics.”
The attention of the President. and of the Congress is especially in~ited to the closing
section of the report, entitled ~cA hTational Aviation Policy l>)and the specific recommendations
of the I?Tational Ad-visor-y Committee for Aeronautics therein set forth as to. the legislative
steps which in its -judgment. are necessary to carry such a national a-riation policy into effect.
Respect. fulIy submitted.
~ATION.iL
c ~s

IJTI’TEIt

ADVISORY ~031M~
~.

Wacnrr,

FOR .biONA~CS;

(?A.irh=man.

OF SUBMITTAL.

To the Senate and Eouse of l?epresenifai%ves:
In compliance with the provisions of the act. of March 3, 1915, making appropriations
for the naval ser-rice for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1916, 1 transmit herewith the Sixth
Annual Report. of the Nat ionaI Advisory Committee for Aeronautics for the fkcal year ended
June 30, 1920.
The attention of the Congress is invited to the recommendation
of the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics for the establishment of a Bureau of Aeronautics in the Dep~rtThe
ment of Commerce for the regulation and encouragement
of commercial aviation.
nationaI aviation policy as formtiated
by the ~Tatkml .%dvisory Committee for Aeronautics
and the constructive recommendations
therein set forth for the com~ideration of the Congress
have the hearty approval of the departments concerned as well as myself.
WOODROw Wuox.

T=

~-

~C)UXE,
T llecembei=,

1920.
1

“

.—

CONTENTS.
Psga
5
6
6
7
8
s
9
9
10
18
18
1s
19
19
19
20
20
21 21
21
22
28
34
38
~~

Functiom oftiecofittee
------------------------------------------------------------------------------Organim.tionof tiecofitiee
---------------------------------------------------------------------------~eexecutive
cotittee
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Subcohttees
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Quatiers formtitiee
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------The Langley ?Jemorial .4eronautical Laboratory. . . . . . . . . . ------------------------------------------------05ceof Awonautid InteWgence----- .-. --------. ..--. -.-... --.. --. ---- _----- ..-----_ ---__ j-----------~eA~onauticd
Bmrdofthe ~ymd
Na~-... -... -.. - . . ..------.~----------..
------ . . ..-j -----------Or@tiation ofgo\-amen&
activities inaeronautiw ------------------------------------------------------~anda’smwte~re~wdtighenmn
tipUoW -----------------------------------------------------------Intaationd
Con%-ention MNati~tion-...
on
- . . -------------------------------------------------------~eci\fl
~wof Ga\~~ent Iandtig fields----------------------------------------------------------------Proteetionof aircraft industry hym umfairforei=w competition . . . . . . ---------------------------------------De\'dopment oi&d&tips
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Prtiuction ofhelim ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Education in advanced aeronautical engineeri.n~
Q--------------------------------------------.-.-..-------Nomendatwe foraeronautim ----------------------------------------------------------------------------Bibli~aphy ofaeronzutim -----------------------------------------------------------------------------Dktnbution ofmetmrol@cd
kfomation by*el=-------------------------------------------------------

Aaol@=l work ofhe Weati=Bmeau -------------------------------------------------------------------Reptio~Comittee
on-Aerti]mtics -------------------------------------------------------------------Repotiof ~otittee OnpOwerPlmkfor ficti
----------------------------------------------------------Report of~otittee
on31atefiak for M~@-------------------------------------------------------------~e&timlpubE=tiom oftieco~ittee
------------------------------------------------------------------Rew=chpro~anda*ates -------------------------------------------------------------------------Ftiancialre~rt ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------~onclmion-A natioDalal~ationpoEcy-------------------------------------------------------------------*~~~~fi
REPORTS.

--

,

54
54

No. S3. Wind Tunnel SMiesinA
wodynuicPhen omenaat
High Sped ----------------------------------~oes4A Data onthe Defi=~OiPl~oOdfor fimfi~--------------------------------------------------------No. SS. Moktwe R*tant Ftibesfor ~lane Wtis ----------------------------------------------------No. S6- Properties of Special Tj~es of Qfiatom ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------No. S7. Etiectsof Nslureof cmtig Stiaceon Miatorptiommce

No. SS. Pre-e DroPti Radiator .ti Tub= ------------------------------------------------------------NO.s9. ~omparkon of Alcoa= .kviation Fuel with Export .k~-iation
Gasoline. .. . . . . . -------------------NO.90. ~ompmkmofHecterFuel titi Ewti AY5ationG&wltie. . . . . -------- -----------------------------No. 91. Nornendatme for.4eronautia --------------------------------------------------------------------No. 9?. Analysk of Whg WwStrews ------------------------------------------------------------------No. 93. Aerodynaruic C3mracteti’tim of Aerofo&---------------------------------------------------------

-.

No. 94= The Efficiency of SmalI Beari.ng sinInstruments of the T]~e U=dtifiuAt
-----------------------No. 95. D&-s
of@lme
S@bflity --------------------------------------------------------------------No. 96. Statical Longitudind Stabilityof Mr#anes . . . ---------------------------------------------------NO.97. General Theory of the Steady Motion of an@lane ------------------------------------------------No. 98. Design of Wkd Twekmd
Wtid Twel Propdws, 11------------------------------------------No. 99. Accderations tiF~aht ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------No. 100- Accelerometer Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ------- ------------------------NO. 101. The Calculated Performance of Airplanes Equipped with Superchar=tig Engines . . . . . . . ------------No. 102. Performance ofa Lib@y M&lane
En~tie ----------------------------------------------------NO. 103. Performance of a W-Horsepower Hispano-Stia Airplahe Engine . . . . . . . . . . . -.- --------.----------.
No. 104. Torsion oflVing Tmwsat Di\tig Speeds--------------------------------------------------------No. 105. Angkof Attack and AirSpeeds DMmeuvws -----------------------------------------------No. 106. Turbulence in fiefi
Tub& of Radiatom for Aircraft En=ties ------------------------------------No. 107. A High-Speed Engine Pressure Indicator of the Balanced D~aphra=- Type... ---------------------No. 10S. Some Factors of&line
En@e Pafomance ---------------------------------------------------XO- 109. Experhentd Research on Air Prope~@% IV----------------------------------------------------No. 110. The Mtitide Effect on& Speed Indictors ------------------------------------------------------* Techr&i4Reports, urubw 1 to S2!published
n
with previous
Armuril
Reports.

.

3

57
107
123
131
149
161
171
185
195
237
257
337
347
373
Ml
471
481
89
.505
559
579
601
609
621
635
649
679
691

.

.

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOR

AERONAUTICS.

2722NAVY BUILDZNG,
WASHI14GTI?N, C.
D.

CH~BLESD. WALCOTT, e. D., Ck@ma?z,
S
Secretary Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. Q._
S. W. %RATTON,Sc. D., i3ecr&wv,
Director Bureau of Standards, Washington, D. C. JOSEPHS. Aams, Ph. D., Chairman h’xecutke Committee,
Director Physical Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, EaItiraore, Md.
THUBMAN B~N~, Major, United States Army,
H.
Chief Engineering Di!ision, Air Service, Dayton, Ohio,
T, T, CRAVEN,
Captain, United States h’avy,
Director of Na~al Aviation, Washington, D. (3.
WILLIAMF. DWt-AND,
Ph. D.,
Professor of .Uechanical Engineering, Leland Stanford Junior University, California.
JOHN IT. HAmow, C. E,,
Director College of Engineering, h’orthwestem University, Ikanston, 111. ,
CHARLES MARVIN,M. E.,
l?.
Chief United States Weather Bureau, Washington, D. C.
CHARLES MJINOHER,
T.
Major Qeneral, United States ,4mny,
Chief of Air Service (War Depallment), Washington, D. C.
.
MICHAEL PL-PIN,Ph. D,,
1,
Professor of I?lectro-Meehtmics, Columbia University, A’ew York City.
D. W. T~YLOE,Rear Admiral, United States Navy,
Chief Constructor, Na~y Dep~rtment~Washington, D“. C.
ORVILLE
V?BIGHT, . S.,
B
Dayton, Ohio,
EXECUTIVE

COMMITTEE.

~OSEPES. Aims, ~lmtrrnan.
S. W. STEAT~OX, ecmta~.
S
TEUBMANH. BANE.
T. T. CBAWN.
JOH?JF. I+ LIYVOI:I).
CHARLES M-kRVIN.
F.
4

CHARIEST. MENOH~R.
D, W. TAYLOR.
CHARLES W~LCOT~.
D.

.—

SIXTH

ANNUAL

REPORT

OF THE

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOR

.AERONAUTICS.

&’ATIONAII .&DVISORY~03KITI’EE

Washington,

FOR AERONAUTICS>

D. (7., Nowernber

M, 1920.

~G i%3 (?ongrew:

In accordance with the provision of the act of Congress, approved March 3, 1915, establishing the National Advisory Committee for -Aeronautics: the committee submits herewith its
Sixth Annual Report.
In this report the committe has described its activities during the
past year, the teel+ical progress in the study of scientific problems reIat.ing to aeronautics,
the assistance rendered by the committee in the formulation
of a policy regarding the organiz~tion of governmental
activities in aeronautics the coordination of research -work in
general, the examination of aeronautical in-rentions~ and the collection, analysis, and cKstribution of scientific and technical data. This report also cent ains a state~ent of expenditures,
estimates for the fiscal -year 19!22, and a discussion of a national aviation poLicy with certain spec.itlc recommendations
for the consideration of Congress.
FUNCTIONS

OF THE

C0313HTTEE.

The N’ational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics was established by act of Comgress,
approved March 3: 1915. The organic act charges the committee -with the supem-ision
and direction of the scient itlc study of the problems of tlight with a -riew to their p~aetical
solution, the determination
of problems -which should be experimentally
att aeked, their investigation and application to practical questions of aeronautics.
The act also authorizes the
committee to direot and conduct research ancl experimentation
in aeronautics ,in such laboratory or laboratories in whoIe or in part as may be placed under its direction.
Supplementing
the prescribed duties of the committee, its broad general functions may
be stated as follow:
F’irst. Under the Iaw the committee holds itself at the service of any department
or
agencv of the Gover~ent
interested in aeronauti&, for the furnishing
of information
or
a.%i&ce
iU regard to scimtific or technical matters relating to aeronautics: and in particular for the investigation
and st~~dy of problems in this field with a view to their practical
solution.
Second. The committee may also esercisc its functions for any individual,
firm, association, or corporation within the United States; provided that such individual, firm, association, or corporation defray the actual cost in-rolved.
Third. The committee institutes research, investigation,
and study of problems which,
in the judagment of its members or of the members of i~ ~arnous ~bcommittees~ are needfiI
and timely for the advance of the science and art of aeronautics in its various branches.
Fourth. The committee keeps itself advised of the pro=gress made in ressarch and experimental work in aeronautics in all parts of the worldl particularly iu England, France, and
Italy, and will ex~end its efforts in the securing of info~mation from Germany, -/wstria: Canada,
and other countries.
Fifth. The informati&
thus gathered is brought to the attention of the variow subcommittees for consideration iu connection with the preparation of programs for research and
This information is ako made available promptly to the
experimental -work in this country.
5

.
6

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CO;WMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

.

military and naval air services and other branches of the Government, and such as is not confidential is immediately released to university laboratories and aircraft manufacturers
intermted in the study of specific problems. and also to the public,
Sixth. The committee holds itself at the service of the President, the Congress, and the
executive departments of the Government for the consideration of special problems which may
be referred to it, such as organization of governmental activities in aeronautics, recommendations as to proper action under the Con~ention for the Regulation of International Air Navigation, questions of policy regarding the regulation and cleve~opment of civil aviation, advanced
education in aeronautical engineering> etc.
ORGANIZATION

OF THE COMMITTEE.

‘Me committee has 12 members. appointed by the President.
The law provides th~t the
personnel of the committee shall consist of two members from the War Department, from the
office in charge of military aeronautics; two members from the hTavy Department, from the
ot%cein charge of nzval aeronautics: &representative each of the Smithsonian Institution! of the
17nited States Weather Bureau, and of the United States Bureau of Standards; and not more
than five additional persons acquainted with the needs of aeronautical science, either civil or
military, or skillecl in aeronautical engineering or its allied sciences. Ml members as such serve
without compensation.
During the past year Mr. Orville Wright was appointed by the President to membership
on the committee to succeed Dr. John R. Freeman. resigned.
The full committee meets twice a year, the annual meeting being held in October and the
The present report includes the activities of the committee besemiannual meeting in April.
tween the annual meeting held on October 9, 1919, and that hekl on October 7.1920.
The present organization of the committee is as follow-s:
CharIes D. Wzlcott, Se. D., chairman.
S. W. Stratton, Sc. D., secretary.
Joseph S. Ames, Ph. D.
*
- Maj. Thurman H. Bane, United States Army.
Capt. T, T. Craven, United States Navy.
William F. Durand, Ph. D.
John’ F. Hayford, C. E.
Charles F. Marvin, M. E.
Maj. Gen. Charles T. Menoher, United States Army.
Michael I. Pupin, Ph. D.
Rear Admiral D. W: Taylor, United States Navy.
Orville ?Vright, B. S.
THE EXECUTIVE

COMMITTEE

For carrying out the work of the Aclvisory Committee the regulations provide for the election annually of an executive committee. to consist of se~-en members, ancl to include further
any member of the Advisory Committee not othemvise a member of the executive committee,
but resident in or near NTashington and giving his time wholly or chiefly to the special work
of ihe committee.
The executiw committee: as elected ancl organized on October 7, 1920: is as
follow :
Joseph S. Ames, Ph. D., chairman.
.
S. W. Stratton, Sc. D,; secretary,
Maj. Thurman H. Bane, United States Army,
Capt. T. T. Craven, United States Navy.
John F. IIayford, C. E.
Charles 1?. 3farvin, M. E.
Maj. Gen. Charles T. Menoher. United States Army.
Rear Admiral D. MT,Taylor, IJuitwl States ~avy,
Charles D, Walcott, Se. D,

___

—

ANWU’kL REPORT NATIONAL ADWSCIRY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

7

The executive committee, in accordance with the general instructions of the Advisory Committee, exercises the functions prescribed by Imv for the whole committee, administers the
affairs of the committee: and exercises general supervision over alI its. activities.
The executive committee held regukm montMy meetings throughout the year, and in addition held three
special meetings: on the following dates: October 9} 1919; March 1 and June 29, 1920.
The executive committee has organized the neceesary clericzl and technical staffs for handling the work of the committee proper. GeneraI responsibility for the execution of the programs and policies approved by the executive committee is ~ested in the executi~e officer, Mr.
George W. Lewis. In the subdivision of general duties, he hm immediate charge of the scientific cmd technical work of the committee, being directly responsible to the chairman of the
executive committee, Dr. Joseph S. Ames. The assistant secretary, Mr. .John F. Victory, has
charg~ of administration
and personneI matters. property, and disbursements! under the direct
control of the secret a~’ of the committee, Dr. S. W. Stratton.

.—

.

STJ13COY.MITTEES.
The executive committee has organized six st ancling subcommittees,
administrative
and technical, as follows:

divided into two classes,

TECHMMIA

ADMIMSTRATIVE.
Personnel, buildings, and equipment.
Publications and intelligence.
Governmental reld.ions.

Aerodynamics.
Power plants for aircraft.
I MateriaIs for aircraft.
.
The orgcmization ancl work of the technical subcommittees are co~ered in the reports of
those committees appearing in another part of this report. .4 statement of the organization and
functions of the administrate-re subcommittees
follows:
COMMITTEE ON PERSOXNEL,

/

.

IHHLDINGS, AND EQUIPMENT.

FUNCI-IOXS.
1. To handIe all matters relating to perscmnel, incIuding the employment, promotion, discharge, and duties of all empIoyees.
2. To consider questions referred to it and make recommendations
regarding the initiation
of projects concerning the erection or aRercdion of laboratories and the equipment. of laboratories and offices.
3. To meet from time to time on the call of the chairman, ancl report its actions and recommendations to the executive committee.
and equipment work as may be authorized by the
4. To supervise such construction
executive committee.
ORGANZATIOX.

Dr. Joseph S. Ames, chairman.
Dr. S. D. Stratton. vice-chairman.
Prof. Charles F. 31ar-rin.
J. F. V“ictory, secretary.
COMMITTEE ONTPIIBLXC~TIOllS

~XD I~TELLIGEXGE.

~lh-cmoxs.

classification, and diffusion of technical knowledge on the subject of
1. The collection,
aeronautics including the results of research and experimental
work done in alI parts of
the -world.
2. The encouragement of the study of the subject of aeronautics in i~=titutions of Iearning.
3. Supervision of the otlice of aeronautical intelligence.
4. Supervision of the foreia~ office in Paris.
5. The collection and preparation for publication of the technical reports, technical notes,
and mmml report of the committee.

.—

8

—

ANNUAL REPOR-TNATTONAL ADVISORY (30TMITTEE FOR AER”ONAUYICS.
ORGANIZATION.

Dr. Joseph S. Ames, chairman,
Prof. Charles l?. Marvin, jice-chairman,
Miss M. M. Muller, secretary.
COMMITTEE

ON GOVERNMENTAL

RELATIONS.

FUNCTIOXS.

of the committee with executive
1. Relations
Government.
2. Governmental relations with civil agencies.

departments

and other branches

of the

ORGAN1ZATION.
Dr. Charles D. Walcott,
Dr. S. W. Stratton.
J. F. Victory, secretary.
QUARTERS

chairman.

FOR COfiIMITTEE.

on January 12, 1920, pursuant to authorization by the Public Buildings Commission, the
administrative
offices of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics were moved from
the Air Service Building, Fourth Street and Missouri Avenue NT., Washington,
D. C., to
the Navy Building,
Seventeenth
znd B Streets 3??., Washington,
D. C. The technical
work of the committee, conducted by. or under the supervision of the various snbcornmittees, has been carried on in vmious governmental
Laboratories and shops, including
the Bureau of Standards and the committee’s own &Id station at LangIey Field, Ira., known
as the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory, and also in various laboratories connected
with institutions of learning whose cooperation in the conduct of scientific research in ~eronautics has been secured.
THE LANGLEY

MEMORIAL

AERONAUTIC.4L

LABORATORY.

In previous annual reports, {he committee described the progress nm.de in the development
of its field station at. Langley Field, Vs., for the prosecution of scientific research in aeronautics. The station now comprises three principal units, nameIy, an aerodynamical laboratory or wind tunneI. an engine dynamometer laboratory. md a research laboratory builcling,
the latter includi]~,g administrative
ancl drafting offices, machine and -wood-working shops,
The research laboratory and the wind tunnel
and photographic and instrument laboratories.
bnilding are of permanent brick construction; ‘the engine dynamometer Laboratory is housed
in a temporary four-section steel airpIane ha~gar.
With the completion of the wind tunnel proper, in .kpril, 1920, the committee sought the
ap provaI of the President to name its field station in honor of the late Dr. SamueI Pierpont
LangIey.
With the approval of the President and the Attornes General, the field station was”
accordingly given the name “ LangIey Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory,” and was formaIIy
opened as such, -with appropriate exercises, on. June. 11, ~920. Special’ invitations to men
prominent in the development of aviation &. the Unitecl States were issued jointly by the
committee and the Director of Air Service of the Arm-y. The executive committee, the aerodynamics committee, and the power plants committee held meetings at the field in the morning,
and in the afternoon the members. the invited guests, of whom a number hacl flown to the
field from Washington and more distant points, and the otlicers of the field assembled in the
wind tunnel building, where formal dedicatory remarks were made by Dr. Joseph S, Ames.
as (lhairman of the Executive Committee, by Maj. Gen. Charles T, Menoher, as Director of Air
Service of the Army and member of- the committee, and by Rear Admiral D. W. Taylor,
as Chief Constructor of the Navy and member of the committee.

.

ANNUAL REE’OFLT
N&TION&L AINZSORY CO.
MMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

9

The Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory occupies a plot of ground kmown as Plot
16, Langley Field, Ta.: the plot having been set aside for the committee’s use by the Chief
Siagal Officer of the Army at the time the site was selectecl as a proposed joint experimental
station and proving ~grcmnd for the Army znd Navy air services ancl the A&&or-y Committee.
The use of that plot of ground -was officially approved by the A-eking Secretary of War on
April 2++,1919. The three buildings at present com~tituting the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory have been erected by the committee pursuant to authority granted by
Congress.
OFFICE

OF AERONAUTICL4L

INTELLIGENCE.

The Office of Aeronautical I@elligenee was established in the earIy part of 1918 as an
Its functions. are the collection, classification,
irdegrd branch of the committee% activities.
and ‘diffusion of technical knowledge on the subject of aeronautics to the military and naval
air services and civil agencies interested including especial] y the results of research and experimental work conducted in all parts of the -world. It is the officially designated Go-vernment depository for scientific and teehnieaI reports and data on aeronaut its. The principal
sources of such te&nicaI information
are the f ollo-iving: The technical subcommittees
znd ‘
their engineering staffs, the E@@eering Division and the Information
Group of the Army
Air Service, the N’aval Air Service, the Bureau of Standarcls, the Forest Service, educational
institutions, ;ndividual professors and experimenters, foreign governmental and private laboratories, and university professors.
Promptly upon receipt, aIl reports are analyzed and classified, and brought to the special
attention of the subcommittees
having cobgnizancel and to the attention of other interested
parties, through the medium of public and confidential bulletins.
Reports are cluplicded
where practicable,, and clk%ributed upon request.
ConfldentiaI buIIetins and reports are not
circulated outside of governmental channels.
To efficiently handIe the work of securing -and exchanging reports in forei,gn countries,
the committee maintains a technical assistant in 13nropel with headquarters in Paris. It is
his duty to personality visit the Government and private Laboratories, centers of aeronautical
information,
and private individuals in 13nglancl? Francet ItaIy, German-y! ancl Austria, ancl
endeavor to secure for America not only printed matter which would in the ordinary course
of events become available in this eountr-j, but more e-specially to secure advance information
as to work in progress, and any technical data not prepared in printed form, and which would
otherwise not reach this country.
Tho service rendered by the 05ce of Aeronautical Intelligence during the past year has
increased by tipproximately
60 per cent, including increases in services renclered to the Na-raI
Air Service of& per cent; other go~ermcnenta.1 agencies, 60 per cent; aircraft manufacturers,
1(I()per cent; educ~tional institutions, 180 per cent.
The technicaI assistant in Europe, in addition to rendering periodical reports as to developments in aeronautics, based on close personal observation of conditions in European countries, has secured for the committee many ~aluable reports and documents, including a number
of complete sets o+ reports of the scientific research and experimental
work conducted ill
Germany during the war.
THE AERONAUTICAL

- .—

‘

.

BOARD OF THE ARMY AND NAVY.

Tl,e Aeronautical
Board was appointed by the Secretary of Tar and the Secretary of
the Ka~y, and is composed exclusi~ely of .~rm~ and ~Tav officers. It has no oficia~ connection
with the hTational Advisory Committee for Aei-onautic~3 its functions being the consideration
of military questions regarding the use of aeronautics in hth ser~ces- The co?ittee
fee~~
that there is a positive need for such a joint board; in fact, the present Aeronautical Board is
n development of the Joint Army and Navy Technical Aircraft Board which was established

.

—

10

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMr’r!33E FOR AERONAUTICS.

of this committee.
cluring tl-w war on the recommendation
There is no friction or duplication
of tunctions whatsoever between the Aeronalltical Board and this committee.
On the ccmtrary, a cordial contact has always existed where the work of the two organizations brought
them together.
ORGANIZATION

OF GOVERNMENTAL

ACTIVITIES

IN AERONAUTICS.

During the pzwt year the committee has on numerous occasions given consideration to the
sub] ect of organization of governmental activities in aeroua’utics. A number of bilk lmd been
introdl~ced in Congress providing -widely differing solutions of the question, and each of these
After the acl-jom-nrnent of Congress and thromghont
bilk was discussed by the committee..
the summer and fall of 1920 the committee endeavored to coordinate the views of the various
governmental agencies interested, and to develop a tentative draft of legislation giving definite
expression to the agreements reachecl, In its consideration of each of the measures in<rodueed
the committee was Wided by an intimate knowledge Qf th~ problems peculiar to the mntary
and naval air services, by the necessit-y of providing for , imcl reckoning with, a healthy
development of civil aviation. and by broad general considerations of%ound governmental
polmy in regarcl to matters of organization and aclministration.
Of all the bills analyzed by
the committee, two were sdected foi more earnest consideration, and in each case this has led
to agreement upon amendments which wi!l,.in the committee’s juclgment, render either measure,
if enacted into Iaw! operative with a mmunum of friction. confusion: or waste, at the same
time utilizing existing agencies to the best interests of_ good administration.
An analysis of
the two bills referrecl to: as modified by tke committee? follovm:
House biIl 14061 was introduced into the House ofllepresentatives
by Mr. Kahn, May 13,
1920. With the modifications recommended by the Niitional Aclviwry Committee for Aeronautics, It provides for the establishment of a Bureau of Aeronautics in the Departmen& of
Commerce, in charge of a Commissioner of Air Navigation whose duties will comprise the
licensing of aircraft, pilots, and airclrome.s, the designation of-flying routes, cooperation with
the States and municipalities
in the laying out of landing fields, and, in general, the promotion of all matters looking to the advancement of commercial aviation.
The bill provides also
th~t alf rules and regulations goyerning zir navigation , licenses, etc., shall be formulate! by
the Commissioner of Air h~a-vigation, tiho shall submit the same to the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics for consicleration, criticism, and recommendation to the Secretary
of Commerce, who, if the same meet with his approval, shall formally promulgate the same.
The bill provicles further that the Commissiormr of Air Navigation shall be appointed a
member of the National Advisor3 Committee for Aeronautics, and shaII seek the approval
of the committee in certain matters! such as the laying out of flying routes, etc., which may
hold a vital interest for other departments of the (io~ernment.
The committee believes that
all such extensi17e plans ShOUICl be carefully considered with a view to serving the nztional
interests as far as possible; that the Commissioner of Air hTavigation should have the benefit
of the counsel and advice of the other governmental agencies concerned; and that the method
proposed in this bill would be practicable and effective.
House bill 14137 “was introduced in the House of Representatives by Mr, Hicks, May 19,
1920. With the modifications recommended by the hTational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, it makes substantially
the same pro-visions for the regulation and development of
air na~igation as the modified bill, H. R, 140611 described above. with severs] additions viz, :
That the various departments of the Government shall prepare programs for experimental
research or development work in aeronautics, and for the purchase or eo.nstruetion of aircraft,
engines, accessories, and hangars, and the acquisition of land for purposes in connection with
aviation; tind shalI submit such programs to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
for consideration and recommendation
before contracts–xr~de
or orclers are placed for
same; that for the purpose of preliminary correlation of &imates the various departments
shall submit their estimates for all aviation purposes to the National Advisory Committee

ANXUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

11

for Aeronautics for consideration and recommendation b~ the committee before the estimztes
are submitted to Congress, the comments and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee to
be transmitted
XO Congress tdong with the estimates.
The committee has been actuated in its suggested retiion
of these bills by a clesire to
produce practicable -workable plans for improving
the existing situation.
The wnm.mittee
believes that the Hicks bill as modified is reisponsi~e to that sentiment in Congress which has
sought to prevent dupkicat ion of expenditures and eftort in the military and naval air services.
The committee is not -ivholIy convinced that the necessity for such legislation exists at the
present time, nor that the method proposed -wouId have the desirecl resul~
On the other hand,
the committee is unanimous in supporting the Kahn bilI as modified.
The most urgent need
at this time is the dcrvelopment of commercial aviation uncler Federal regulation.
The~e has
been some objection to placing the regulation of air navigation under the Department
of
Commerce, but the XationaI Adtiory
Committee for Aeronautics believes it unnecessary and
unwise to create another independent
Go-vernment essablisbment
for the exercise of such
functions, and ‘that by making the Commissioner of Air Navigation a member of the National
Advisory Committee for A.eroriautics, and requiring him to submit his plans to the committee,
he can not fail to be guided in his actions by considerations of paramount national interests.
The text of the two bills referred to, as modified by the National Adtisory
Committee for
Aeronautics. follows:

INTEODIJCIII ~H~ HOUSE
mOFI~EPRES=ii~TnXS Y W. KAHN, MAY 13, 1920.
B
A BILL To regulate sir navigation witi~ tie United states ~d i= ea~de~cies, =d betwem tie United States or an~
of ite dependenciesend any foreign country or its dependermies.

Be it enacted by the Senate ami House of Beprewztatices
of the United States or America in Con~res-s
uswn bled, TIM to provide for the regulation of air rmtigation and to render effeetive the provisions of any
treaty or convention relating to air navigation that may hereafter be entered into by the United Stat+ there
is hereby established in the Department of Commerce a bureau to be known as the Bureau of Aeronautics,
and a Commissioner of Air h’a~igation, who eMI be the heaii thereof, who shall be appointed by the President,
by a~d with the advice and coned of tie SenRte, and who ‘~au receive a salary of $6,0GQper annum The
(;ornmissioner of Air Xa~igation sM1l be appointed by the President an additional member of the National
Ad%%xmyCommittee for Aeronautics.
SEC. z. That there shall be in said bureau, an assistant cOKOniSSiOnerf recognized technical abiiity, who
o
shall be appointed by the President, by and with the ad~ice and consent of the Senate and who ehail receive
a edary of $5,000 per annum. The assistant commissioner shall perform such duties as may be prescribed
by the commissioner, or as may k required by law. There ehaii also be in eaid bureau a chief cIerk, and
such other clerical assistants, inspector% c=perk% and SPedal agents as may be required from time to time
and authorized by Congress.
SEC. .3. That all rules and regulations hereinafter prcwided for, except as otherwise provided for in
section 9 hereof, shall be formulated by the Commissioner of Air h“avigation, who shall submit the same to
the >’ational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics fOr consideration, criticism, and recommendation to the
Secretary of Commerce, who, if the Same meet with his aPProwZ maii formally promulgate the same. When
approved and duty promulgated by the Secretary of COmmerL%such Nle3 and regulations shaii be legally
binding and enforceable from the date of such Promulgation, UUleW otherwke provided therein: Prorided, That here&er the Xa tional Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, in addition to the exercise of
iw present functions is authorized to act in an advisory capacity in connection with the formulation
and promulgation of such ruies and resuiationsi and for the consideration of questions of policy affecting
the development of eiril or commercial aviation, including recommendations from time to time for maendments to this act or subsequent acts
SEC. 4. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation ehalI, ti accordance with eeetion 3 hereof, formulate
ali neceesary and proper rules and regulations resecting air na~igation and air trafic, issuance of licenses
for aircraft, aviators and aeronauts rules of the air, the tiving and heeding of signals, periodical and
before-fight inspection of aircraft the carrYi.ng of lights and signals, the landing at and departure from
airdromes, usiug prescribed routes and avoidimg prohi~lted area% the carrying and lightening of ballast,
the carryng aud nse of’ wireiess telegraph and telephone instruroents and other radio equipment, the carrying,
keeping, and exhibiting of log books and other records, the landing for customs or Migration
inspector%
Such rules and regulations shall
fmd other matters for the safety and convenience of air navigation.
preseribe air routes and prohibited areas o~er which aircraft shall not flY for military reasons or in the
Such ruies and regulations shall include descriptions OL and, if neeessa~,
interest of public safety.

12

ANNUU REPORT NATIONAL ADmSORY ~OllX.ITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

maps showing such air routes and- prohibited areas, and shall incIude aii areas over which tbe Secretary
of War or the Secretary of the N“avy may request in writing the prohibition of the movement of aircraft.
AI1 aircraft engaged in air rmyigaticm within the jurisdiction of the United States or its de~nderwies,
or coming into such jurisdiction from a foreign country or its dependencies, or upon the high seas as to
such aircraft as are flying under a United States Iiceuse, and as 60 aircraft over which the United States
has jurisdiction on other groauds, are hereby required to conform to the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this act.
Sm. 5. That all airdromes wi~hin the jurisdiction of the United States and its dependencies are hereby
required to conform to such rules and regulations regarding the placing aud use of lights and signals, the
size and marking of Ianding places, and other matters for the safety of air navigation as may be prescribed
by the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this act.
SEC.6. That ail rules and regulations, as hereii~ provided, shall be so formulated as to carry out the
provisions of this act and subsequent acts and of. any treaty or convention which may hereafter be entered
into by the United States. The Secretary of Commerce nuiy alter, nmdify, amend, or revoke such rules and
regulations in the same manner as provided in section 3 for the promulgation thereof, subject to the pro~isio~s
of this act and any subsequent act and the provisions of auy treizty which has been or may hereafter be
entered into by the United Stztes.
SEC.7. That it shall be the pro~ince and duty of the Bureau of Aeronautics, except as may be otherwise
provided, to foster, develop, and promote @l matters pertaining to civil or commercial aeronautics, including
the co~lwtion and dissemination of information relating thereto, the administration of all rules and
regulations provided for in this act, the regulation aml arrangement of landing fields and airdromes, and
the allotment of such funds as may be provided by law to aid the various States in the establishment of
landing fields and airdromes.
Sm 8. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation is authorized and direct~d to pIan aerial routes
throughout the United States aud its possessions, and to this end shall cooperate -with the various States,
cities, and muuieipaIities for the purpose of setting aside znd establishing airdromes and landing fields
to be used i~ common by l?ederaI, State, muniripaI, commercial, and private aircraft under the rules and
regulations to be duIy promulgated in accordance with section 3 of this act: Procidcd, That such plans for
aerial routes and the establishment of airdromes and landing fieIds shalI be submitted to the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics, and upon approval by said advisory committee shall be carried into effect by
the Commissioner of Air Navigation to the extent of the appropriations available for such purpose.
SEC.9. That for the purpose of encouraging the de~”eIopment of commercial aeronautics in the United
States, full cooperation shall be given by the Bureau of Aeronautics to the owners or operators of private
or commercial aircraft, and that the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the h-avy, the Postmaster General,
wad the Secretary of Commerce shall furnish to any owner or operator of private or commercial aircraft
Ianding on an airdrome or Ianding field under their respective jurisdictions, aviation fuel, oil, supplies, and
~iecessary mechanical assistance of an emergency character, under such regulations as they may appro~e
and promulgate for their.respective services. The proceeds from such &lles and assistance shall be deposited
in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the appropriations involved,
Sm. 10. That no aircraft shall be used or operated in air navigation within the United States or its
dependencies, or between the United States and any of its dependencies, or between the United States or
dependencies, or on the high seas as to aircraft over
my of its dependencies and any forei.w country or its
which the United States has jurisdiction, except under and in accordance with a license granted by the Commissioner
of Air Navigation to the owner of the aircraft. Aircraft so licensed shaIl not be used or operated
in air na~igation except in accordance with the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with
this act: Provided, That aircraft and operators of the same duly registered znd Iicensed in other countries
and only transitorily or periodically in the United States aud its dependencies may be exempted by treaty
or convention from the. requirements as to securing a license provided for in this section and section 11
hereof, but shall be subject to all other swtions of this act and the rules and regulations duly promulgakd
in accordance with this act ,s0 long as they are within the boundaries of the United States and its
dependencies.
Such license for aircraft shaIl not be granted unless the owner is a citizen of the United States or of its
dependencies, or if such owner be a company or corporation, then a company or corporation organized under
the laws of the United States or some one of the States thereof, the president or chairman and the majority
of the members of which company, or the president or chairman and a majority of the bo~rd of directors and
the holders of a majority of the stock of which corporation, are citizens of the United States or of its
dependencies, nor unless such aircraft shall be constructed in a manner suitable for the service in which it
is to be employed and is in a condition to warrant the beliefi that it may be used for such service in air
navigation with reasonable safety, such construction, including standards of both workmanship and material,
and condition to be determined in accordance with the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance
with this act,
The Commissioner of Air Navigation shall keep a record in which licensed aircraft shall be registered,
aud such rerord shall contain, in a statement made under oath, the name of the owner of the afrcraf~ a state-

A2YNUAL REPORT NATION-AL ADVISORY COMX.ITTEE FOR AERONAUHCS.

13

ment as to Ltiscitizenship, or, in the case of a company or corporatio~ the facts showing that it comes within
the provisions of this section, the purpose fur which the aircraft is to be used, and an aceurat.e description of
such aircraft..
Sueh Iicenae shall expire cme year from the date of its issuance or UPODa change of ownership of the
aircraft, -whichever may first occur, and shall not be renewed or extended, but upon expiration thereof in
either of the manners mentioned the owner of the aircraft may aPply for a new license upon complying with
the laws and the rules and regnltitions duly promulgated in accordance with this ack
Auy .wch license may be re~oked at ‘any time by ‘the Commissioner of Air A’avigation upon its being
show-u to his satisfaction that any of the facts anfi qualiilwitions ulxm which the isssance of such license was
based have ce~~ed to @Eti or upon failure to compiy with the existing Ia~S &d roles and regulation
Foc the purpose of ascertaining the Pads upon which to determine whe’der licenses shall be granted or
revoked the Commissioner of Air Navigation sho.11ha~e the right to conduct hearings, to smnrnon witnesses,
to administe: oaths, aud to inspect. books and records, inc~uding the stock booka of companies and corpmations.
SEC.11. That no person shall operate an aircraft engaged in air na~igation as pro~ided in .Wtion 10 of
this act, except under and in accordance with a Iicense granted by the Commkioner of Air A“avigation, and
ths Commissioner of Air Navigation is authorized to grant such licen.w in accordance with rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this act.
Such license elmii expire one year frum date of its issuance u&as sooner revoked by the Oommi=ioner of
Air XaTigation ui]on its being shown to his satisfaction that any of the facts and qualitlcationa upon which
the issuance of such license was based htve ceased to @st or upon f~ilnre to c’omply with the existing lrLws
and rulee aud regulations, but upon the expiration of such Iicense the holder thereof may apply for a new
Iicense by complying with the laws and rules and regulations duly promnlgatel in accordance with tkis act.
SEC. M. No airdrome shall he operated except under and fi accordance with a license granted by the
Commissioner of Air Navigation to the owner of the airdrome in accordance with the rules and regulations
duly promulgated in accordance with this act: Prorided, That such owner shall be a cittzen of the United
States or of its dependencies or, if such owner be a company or corporation, then a company or corporation
organized under the laws of the United States or some one of the States thereof, the president or chairman
aud tie majority of the members of which company, or the president or chairman of the board of directors
zud a majority of the board of directors and the holders of a majority of the stock of which corporation, are
citizens of the United States or its dependencies, and upon its being shown that the airdrome is prepared to
operate in accordance with the said rules and reguhtiona- Such license shall expire upon a change of’
ownership of the airdrome and shall not be renewed or extended, but a new license may be issued upon
compliance with the laws and rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this ac~ Any
such license may be revoked at any time by the Commissioner of Air hTaFigation upon its being shown to
his satisfaction that any of the facts upon which the issuance of such. iicense was based have ceased to exist,
or upon failure to comply with existing Iaws and rules and regulations duIy promulgated in accordance with
this act.
SEC.13. Thrit the Commissioner of Air Navigation is authorized, subject to the approval of the SecretarF
of Commerce, to fix the fees and charges for the licenses which are authorized by this AeL which fees and
charges shxll be collected by the Commissioner of Air Navigation and co~ered into the Treasury of the
L’nitwl States to the credit of miscellaneous Teceipts
SEC.14. That any person, partnership, joint-stock comWmY, association, or corporation operating aircraft
or an airdrome over which the United States may have j uriadiction On aw groumk, who shali violate any
of the provisions of this act or of the rules and regulations duIy promulgated in accordance with this act, or
who shall aid or abet in such violation, or WBOshall obstruct @r impede compliance with or the enforcement of
the provisions of this act or of any mch rules and regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be ~ed not
more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not more than one year, or botkq in the discretion of the court. In the
~~ent, that such a -riolation shall be by a partnership, joint-stock company, association, or corporation, any
ofiicer, agent, or member thereof who is personality responsibk? for tie tiolation shall be subject to the
punishment herein prescribed. The Commissioner of Air Navigation may also, in case of a conviction, in his
discretion, reroke or suspend for such length of time as he may deem proper any license issued by him to
ths owner or operator, or both, of the aircraft or airdrome in~olwd in any such vioIatiou.

The juri.tiction of the Federal courts of oftenees against the provisions of this act, or the rules rml
~e@ations made pursuant thereto, and the Yenue for the trial of the earoe shall be as prescribed by existing
.
l~w for offenses triable before the Federal courts.
SEC.15. That the provisions of this aet authorizing’ the regulation of air navigation and airdromes, and
the rules and regulations made pursuant thereto, and the Provisions of this act relating to licensing of
.1
ircraft and airdromes and the operators of aircraft, and the rules and regnIations made pursuant thereto,
shall not apply to aircraft nor airdromes owned by the (government of the United States nor to the operators
employed by any depmtment or other governmental agency to operate or assist in the operation of aircraft
owned by the Government of tie United States nor to aircraft buil~ for the Purpose of experiment and flown
for the purpoee of experiment or test within three miles of the airdrome or aircraft factory, nor to operators
(,f aircraft within th~ precincts of an airdrome as deEned in the mid ruies and regulations when ~ch persons

‘

——

-

14

ANNUAL REl?Ol%T ATIONAL ADwSORY ~O”hllNTTEEFOR AERONAUTICS.
N

are under the instruction of a person duly licensed in accordance wit.ir the provisions of section II of this
act, except that all aircraft and operators, Government or otherwise, are required to observe the rrrles and
regrrlations for lights, signals, and rules of the air.
SEC.16. Tbirt such portions of the air’ as are wd~ igable by aircraft and all aircraft navigating the zir are
lrereby declared to be within the admiralty .hrrisdictimr of the Federal courts; and the district courts of the
Utiited States shall have jurisdiction of all cases invol~iug air rra~igation and aircraft, with the right of
tippeal as in other cases, in accordance with existing laws or such laws as may be hereafter enacted, saving
to suitors in al~ cases the right of a common-law r’emedy where the common law is comPetent to give it.
The maritime law and all existing acts and acts hereafter enacted r’elating to water craft and water navigation shall be heId to go~ern aircraft aud air navigation in so far as a~pliwbie thereto and except as modified
by this act and subsequent acts, and by the rules and I’egttEdtionsmade Pursuant thereto, and by the treaties
or convections that may hereafter be entered into IIS’the United States, aud the rules and regulations made
pursrrant thereto.
SEC.17. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation shalI submit estimates for appropriations through the
Secretary of Commerce. He shall tie charged with the duts of examining’ all money accounts covering disbursements of funds appropriated for the Bureau of Aeroriatrtics, with the examination of MI property
accounts coyering all aeronautical property in the custody of the Bureau of Aeronautics, and shall have
power to prescribe, institute, and enforce such system of money and property accountability as in his
judgment wiII best silfegttard the interests of the United States.
SEC.18. That for the puriloses of this act, not chargeable .to existing appropriations, including personal
services in the field and in the District of Columbia, there is hereby appropriated, out of any rrioney in the
Treasury not otherwise appropritited, to be asailable inmuediateUi,the sum of $1OO,OW.
SEC.19. That this a-et shall take effect from and after the dute of its passage, and all acts or parts of
acts contrav to the provisions of ibis act or inconsistent t.here!rith be, and the same are hereby, rePeaIed.
SEC.20. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation shaIl annuaHY, at the close of each fiscal year, make a
report to the Secretary of Commerce, gi~illg an account of all nlone~s reeeived and disbursed by hti and
describing the work done bs’ the bureau, and the Secretary of Commerce shall transmit the report to Congress
with the annual report of the Depa rtnrenf of Commerce.
SEC.21. That if ans section or Provision of this act shall be heId to be invalid, it is hereby provided that
all other sections and provisions of this act which are trot expressly held to be invalid shall continue in full
force and effect.

H. R. 14137’.
INTRO~UC~D HOUSEOF REPRESENTATITW MR. HICKS, MAY 19, 1920.
lN
BY
A BILL To crxte a Bureau of Aeronautics in the Departmentof Commerce,and providing for the orgarrizatlonand
administrationthereof.

Be it enacted by the Senate and Howe of Representatives of the Ufiit~d State$ of Arrwrka in (70n9ress
asse/)~b2ed, That to provide for the regulation of air Ira%ation and to rmder effecti~e the Provisions of any
treaty or conventicm reIating to air na~-igation that may hereafter be entered into by the United States there
is hereby established in the Department of Commerce a hrrrelu to be known as the Bureau of Aeronautics,
aud a Ckunmissioner of Air Navigation, who shall be the head thereof, who shaIl be apwinted by the Presi.
dentnby and with the ad~fce and consent of the Senate, and who shnlI receive a salary of $6,000 per anirnm.
The Commissioner of Air Navigatiorr shall be appointed by the President aR aciditional member of the
NationaI Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
SEC.2. That there shtall be in said bureau an assistant conrmissioner of recognized teclrnicaI abiIity, who
shaIl be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and who shall receive
a salary of $,5,(K)O
per annum. The assisbant commissioner shaIl perform such duties as may be prescribed
by the commissioner or as may be required by law. There shall tilso be in said bureau a chief cIerk and
such other eleric~l assistants, inspectors, experts, and special agents as may be required from time to time
ancl authorized by Congress.
SEC.3. That all rules and regulations herein provided for, except as otherwise provided for in section 12
hereof, shtill be formulated by the Commissioner of Air Navigation, who shall submit the same to the National
Adrisor.v Committee for Aeronautics for consideration, criticism, and recommendation to the Secretary of
Commerce, who, if tire same meet with his appro~al, shalI formalb promulgate the same; when approved
and duly promulgated by the Secretary of (lommerce, such rules and regulations shaIl be legalIy binding
:lud enfoweable from the date of such promulgation unless otherwise provided therein: Prow-ded, That hereaftet’ the ?iationa 1 Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, in addition to the exercise of its present functions,
is authorized to act in an advisory capacity in connection with the formulation and promulgation of srwh
rules and regulations, for the considerate
ion of questions of policy affecting the dereIopmen t of eivil or commercia~ a~iation, including recommendations from time to time for amendments to this act or subsequent
acts, and for the coordina tfotr of the aeronautical activities of the ~’arious departments of the Governmerit.

.

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

15

The said Xational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics shall ha~e authority to consXier and recommend
to the heads of departments concerned, on qriestioms of policy regarding the de~elopment of ciyil aviation,
tit b particuhlr reference to education, preliminary trai~ing, commercia~ production of aircraft, eMabiishment, elimination, and consolidation of all flying fielde and air stations, and ail other matters in eomwetion
therevrith.
SEC.4. That hereafter the War, A’avy, and other departments of the Government shall prepare programs
for experimental research and dewiopment work in aeronautie~ and for the purchase or construction of
air craft, engines, accessories, and hangars, and the acquisition of land for purposes fn connection with aviation, and shalI submit same to the said ad~isory committee for consideration and recommendation before
contracts are made or orders are placed for the purchase, manufactnr% or construction of the same.
SEC.5. That the Xationrd Ad~lsory Committee for Aeronautics sha~l haye authority to recommend to the
heads of the departments cmcerned the tarnsfer of aircraft and aircraft equipment and accessories from one
department to another for tle ci}-ii uses of the Go-rernmenL The heads of the various departments concerned
are authorized to make such transfers of aircraft, equipment, and accessories when recommended by the
said advisory committee.
SEC. . That the said advisory committee shall consider and report upon any question deaiiug with a.via6
t.ion referreit to it by the President or by any of the departments, and shall initiate, report, and recommend
to departmental heads desirable undertahtings or developments in the field of aviation, and each department
shall furnish the mid advkory committee such information as to its a’riation activities aa may be requested.
SEC.7. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation shaiI, in accordance with section 3 hereof, forrtmlate aii
ueeessary and proper rules and rea@ations respecting air navigation and air traffic, issuance of licenses for
aircraft, a~iators, and aeronauts, rules of the air, the giting and heeding of signals, periodical and beforetiight inspection of aircraft, the carrying of lights and signal% the landing at and departure from airdromes,
using prescribed rontes and aroidiug prohibite~ areas, the carrying and lightening of ballast, the carrying
and uee of wireless telegraph and telephone instruments and other radio equipment, the carrying, keeping,
aud exhibiting of Iog books and other records, the landing for customs or immigration inspections, and oLt&er
matters for the safety and convenience of air navigation.
Such rrdes and regnkztions shall pr~scribe air routes aud prohibited areas over which aircraft shall not
tty, for military reasons or in the interest of public safety. Such rules and regulations shall include descriptions of, an~ if necessary, maps showing such zir routes and prohibited areas, and shall incIude ail areas
over whici& the Secretary of War or the Seereiary of the Navy may request in writiig the prohibition of
the movement of airerafk All aircraft engaged in air navigation within the jurisdiction of the United States
or its dependencies or coming into such jurisdiction from a foreign countv or its dependencies, or upon the
high seas as to such aircraft as are flying under a United States license, and as to aircraft over which the
United States has jurisdiction on other gromds, are hereby required to conform to tie rnies and regnlation,s
duly promul=gzitedin aceordanm with this act.
SEC.S. That zdl airdromes within the jurisdiction of the United States and its dependencies are hereby
required to conform to such rules and regulatior!s regarding the placing and use of lights and signals, the
size and marking of landing places, a~d other matter= for the safety of air navigation as may be prescribed
b~ the ruIes and regulations duly promnigated in accordance with this act.
SEC.9. That all rules and regulations as herein pro~ided shall be so formulated as to carry out the provisions of this act and subsequent acts and of any treaty or convention which may hereafter be entered into
by the United States. The Secretary of Commerce may alter, mM1fy, amend, or re~oke such rnles and
regulations in the ~me manner as pro~ided in section 3 for the promnigation thereof, subject to the provisions
of this act and any subsequent act and the provisions of any treaty which has been or may hereafter be
entered into by the UnitW Statesi
SEC.10. That it shail be the pro~ince and duty of the Bureau of Aerona-utice, except as may be otherwise
provided, to foster, de~eIop, and promote all matters pertaining to eivi~ or commercial aeronautic, inelUdiRg
the colkwtion and &~seminatioE of information relating thereto; the administration of alI rules and regulations provided for in this act; the regnhttion and arrangement of landing fields and airdromes; and the
allotment of such funds as may be providd by Iaw to aid the ~arious States in the establishment of landing
tieIds and airdromes.
SEC.IL Th:tt the Commissioner of Air Navigation is authorized ant diiected to plan aeriai routes
tiuwughout the Uuited States and its possessions and to this end shall cooperate with the various States,
cities, and municipalities for the purpose of >stting aside and e~blishing
.aifdromes and landing fields to be
used in common by Federal, Stite, municipal, commercial, and private aircraft under the rales and regaiations to be duly promulgated in accordance with eection 3 of thk act: Pro uided, That such plans for aerial
routes and the establishment of airdromes and landing fields shalI be submittti to the Nationa3 Adviemy
Committee for Aeronautics and, apon approval by said advisory committee, shall be carried into effect by
the Commissioner of Air Navigation to the extent of ‘he appropriations avaiIabIe for sach parpose.
54ss9-21-2

-—

--. .—

16

ANNU~

REPORT NATIONAL ADvE30RY (70MN11TTEE
FOR AERONAUTICS.

SM. 12. That for the purpose of encouraging the development of conunemial aeronautics in the United
States ful~ cooperation shall be given by the Bureau of Aeronautics to the owners or operators of private or
commercial aircrnft, and that the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, the Postmaster General, Rnd
the Secretary of Commerce shall furnish to any owner or operator of iwivate or commercial aircraft landing
on an airdrome or landing field under their respective jurisdictions aviation fuel, oiI, supplies, and necessary
mechanical assista~ce of an emergency character under such regulations as they may approve and promulgate
for their respective services; the proceeds from such saIes and assistance ,shall be deposited in the Treasury of
the United States to the credit of the appropriations involved.
SEO.13. That no aircraft shall be used or operated in air navigation within the United States or its
dependencies, or between the United States and any of its dependencies, or between the United States or rmy
of its dependencies and any foreign country or its dependencies, or on the high sew as to aircraft over which
the United States has jurisdiction, except under and in accordance with a license granted by the Commissioner of Air Aravigation to the owner of the aircraft. Aircraft so licensed shzll not be used or operated
in air na~igation except in accordance with the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accoManee with
this act: Prom’ded, That aircraft and operators of the same duly registered and licensed in other countries
and only transitorily or periodically in the United States and its dependencies, may be exempted by treaty or
convention from the requirements us to securing a license provided for in this section and section 14 hereof,
but shall be subject to all other sections of this act and the rules and regulations duly promulgated in
accordance with this act so long 2s they are within the boundaries of the United States and its dependencies.
Such license for aircraft shall not be granted unle= the owner is a citizen of the United States or of
its dependencies, or if such owner be a company or corporation, then a company or corporation organized
under the laws of the United States or some one of the States thereof, the president or chairman and the
majolity of the members of which comPany, or the plksident or chairman and a majority of the board of
directors and the holders of a majOritY of f-he stock of Wkdch Corporation, are citizens of the United States
or of its dependencies, nor unIess such aircraft shall be constructed in a manner suitable for the service in
which it is to be employed and is in a condition to warrant th-~belief that It may be used for such service
in air navigation with reasonable safety, SUChConstriction, including standards of both workmanship and
material, and condition to be determirved in accordance tith the rules and regulatious duly promulgated in
accordance with this act.
!t’he Commissioner of Air Na~igation shall keeP a record in which licensed aircraft shall be registered,
and such recotd shall contain, in a statement made under oath, the name of the owner of the aircraft, a
statement as to his citizenship, or, in the case of a comPanY or corporation, the facts showing that it comes
within the provisions of tiis section, the PurPose for which the aircraft is to be used, and an acctmate
description of such aircrafL
such license shall expire one ywr from the date of its issuaJJce or upon a change of ownership of’ the
aircraft, whichever may first occur, and shall not be renew-ed or extended, but upon expiration thereof in
either of the manners mentioned the owner of the aircraft may apply for a new license upon complying
with the laws and the rules and regulations duly Promulgated iu accordance with this act.
A.UYsuch license may be revoked at any time by the Commissioner of .kir Navigation upon its being
shown to his satisfaction that any of the facts and qualiEca~ol~s upon ~vhich the issuance of such Iicense
was based have ceased to exist or won failure to com@Y with the existing laws and rules and regulations.
For the purpose of ascertaining the Pacts uPoll w-hich to determfie Ivhether licenses shalI be granted
or revoked, the Commissioner Of Air N-ayigaiion shalI ba~e the right to conduct hearings, to summon witnesses,
to administer oaths, and to inspect books und records, lncluding the stock b~oirs of companies and
corporation~.
SEO. 4. That no person shall operate tln aircraft engaged in ,air navigation as provided in section 13
1
of this act except under and in aceo~dance ‘with a license granted bY the Co~issioner
of Air Navigation, and
ihe Commissioner of Air N’avi@tion is authorized to grant. such license in accordance with the ruIes and
regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this act.
Such license shalI expire one year from date of its issuanw u1ll=s sooner revoked by the Comm@ioner
of Air Navigation upon its being shown to his satisfaction that am’ of the facts and qualifications upon which
the issuance of such license was based have ceased to exist, or uPon failure to coinPlY with the existing laws
pd rules and regulations, but upon the expiration of such I.icense the holder thereof may apply for t new
licerme by complying with the laws and rules and regulations duly Promulgated in accordance with this act.
SEC.15. That no airdrome shaI1 be operated excePt under a~ld in accordance with a Iicense granted by
the Commissioner of Air Na~igation to the owner of the airdrome in accordance with the rules and reguhitions
auly promulgated in accordance with this act: I’rwLded, That such owner shall be a citizen of the United
I
States or of its dependencies; or if such olvner he a coIJlpaly or corporation, then a company or corporation
organized under the Iaws of the Vnited States, or sonw one of the States thereof; the president or chairman
and the majority of the metnbers of which compaw, or the president or chairman of the board of directors
and a majority of the board of directors and the holders of a majority of the stock of which corporation, are
citizens of the United States or its dependencies; aud upon its being shown that the airdrome is prepared
to operate in accordance with the said rules and t’egulatio~s. Such license shaII expire upon a change of
ownership of the airdrome and shall not be renewed or extended, but a Dew license may be iwued IIPOI

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISOFLY M251%EE FOR AEIWNAUTKIS.
CO ~

17

compliance with the laws and rules and regu~ations duly promulgated in accordance with this act. AnY
such license may be revoked at auy time by the Commissioner of Air Navigation upon its being shown to
his satisfaction that any of the facbs upon which the issuance of such licenee was baeed have ceased to exist
or upon failure to comply with existing laws and rules and rehlatiom? duly promulgated in accordance with
this act.
SLc. 16. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation is authorized, subject to the approval of the Secretary
of Commerce, to &x the fees and charges for the Iicenses which are authorized by this ae$ which fees and
charges shall be collected by the Commissioner of Air Navigation and covered into the Treasury of the United
States to the credit of miscellaneous receipts.
SEc. 17. hat
any person, partnership, joint-stcdc company, association, or corporation operating tirCrs.&.
or an airtirmne over which the United Mates may have jurisdiction on cmy grounds, who shall violate
any of the provisions of this act or of the rules and regulations duly promulgated in accordance with this act
or who shall aid or abet in such ~ioIation, or who shall obstruct or impede compliance with or the o?orcement of the provisions of this ae~ or of any such rnle~ and regulations, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more tlwm $l,o(x) or be imprisoned for not more than one year, or botkq in the discretion of the
court. In the erent that such a vfolation shall be by 8 partnership, joint-stock company, association, or corporation, any officer, agent, or member thereof who is peremally responsible for the violation shall be
subject to the punishment herein prescribed. The Commissioner of Air Navigation may also, in case of a
ccmviction, in his discretion, revoke or suspend for such length of time as he may deem proper any license
issued by him to the owner or operator, or both, of the aircraft or airdrome tivol~d in any such violation.
The jurisdiction of tbe Federal courts of offenses against the provisions of this act or the ruIes and
regulations made pursuant fiereto and tie venne for the trial of the same shall be as prescribed by ~s~g
law for offewes triable before the Federal courts.
Szc. 18. That the provi~ons of this act authorizing the re~tiation of air navigation and airdromes, and
tie rules and rea@ations made pnrsuant thereto, and the proviAons of this act relating to licensing of aircraft and airdromes and the operators of aircrafi and the rules and regulations made purswanti thereto,
shun not appIy to airczmft nor airdromes owned by the Government of the Urdted States nor to the operators
employed by any department or other go~ernmental agency to operate or assist in the operation of aircraft
owned by the Government of the United States nor to aircraft buiIt for the Purpose of experiment and flown

for the purpose of experiment or test within three miIes of the airdrome or aircraft factory nor to operators
of aircraft within the precincts of an airdrome as defined in the said rules and regulations whm such persons
are under the instruction of a persori duly licensed in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of this
act, except that all aircraft and operators Go~ernment or otherwise, are required to obser~e the rules and
regulation+for light% signals, and rules of the air.
Sm. 19. That such portions of the air as are navigab~eby aircraft and alI aircraft navigating the air are
hereby dcclmxl to be w~thin tbe a~]raIty jurisdiction of the Federal comts; and the &qtrict courts of the
Unite(l States shall ha~e jurisdiction of aII CM= involving air navigation and aircraft, with the right of
appes.~ as in other eases, in accordance with existimg laws or such laws as may be hereafter enacte~ saving
to suitors in all cases the right of a common-law remedy where the common Iaw is competent to give iti
The maritime law fmd all existing acts and acts hereafter enacted relating to water craft and water mm’igatiou shall k? held to goTern aircraft and air navigation in so far as applicable thereto, and except as
modltled by this act and subsequent acts, and by the rulw and regulations made pursuant thereto, and by
the treaties or conventions that may hereafter be entered into by the United States, and the rules and regulations made pursuant thereto.
SEC.20. That all estimates of funds nwessary to meet the requirements of all services and departments
of the Government for the developmentt, production, operation, and mainte~ance of aircraft, aircraft material
and aaessories, including HeIds, shopsj airdromes, and all other facilities connected therewi@ shall be submitted to the National Advisory Committee for Aeronan tics for consideration and recommendation before they
are submitted to Congress, and any recommendations or sug=-stions made by the said advisory committee
shall be transmitted to the Congress tith the estimates by not later than the 15th day of October of each
year.
SEC. 21. That fie commissioner of Air &’aYigation shall submit estimates for appropri~tions through the
Secretary of Commerce after compliance with the pro~isions of section 20 of this act. He shall be charged
with the duty of examining all money accounts covering disbursements of funds appropriated for the B nreau
of Aeronautics, with the examinatio~ of all property accounts covering alI aeronautical proWrty in the
custody of tie Bureau of Aeronautics, and shall have power to prescribe, institute, and enforce such system
of money and property accountability az in his judgment will best safeguard the interests of the Unit&
States.
SW 22. That for the purpses of this act, not chargeable to existing appropriations, including personal
service in the tleld and in the District of CoMrabia, there is hereby appropriated, out of any money in the
Treasury not otherwiw appropriated, to be available immediately, the sum of $100,000.
SEC.23. That this act shaIl take e~ect from and after the date of its passage, and all acts or parts of
acts contrary to the provisions of this act or inconsistent therewith be, and the same are hereby, repealed.

,

18

ANNUAL REPORT NAmONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUIXCS,

Sm. 24. That the Commissioner of Air Navigation shall annually, at the close of each fiscal year, make o.
report to the Semetary of Commerce, giving an account of all moneys recei~ed and disbursed by him and
describing the work done by the bureau, and the Secretary of C’ommerce shall transmit the report to Congress
with the annual report of the Department of Commerce.
SEO. 5. That if any section or provision of this act shali be held to be invalid, it is hereby provided that
2
all other sections and provisions of this act which are not exp~essly held to be invaIid shall continue in full
force and effeet.

CANADA’S COURTESY REGARDING AMERICAN AIR PILOTS.
ln June, 1920, the committie received through the State Department information to the
effect that the Canadian Air Board had promulgated re=gulatiom permitting United States
qualfied aircraft and pilots to fly in Canada until hTovember 1, 1920, on the same basis as if–
the United States had established air rmgmlations as contemplated under the Convention for
the Iiiegrdation of International
Air IVavigation.
The committee, by resolution adopted at
the July meeting, recommended that the State Department express the appreciation_ of the
Government of the United States for the courtesy of the Canadian Government in this matter,
and, in view of the fact that the Congress of the United States was not then in session and
would not meet until December, 1920, further recommended that tho State Department inquire
if the Canadian Government would be willing to extend by six months from hrovember_ 1, 1920,
ih6 period during which United States pilots and afl{craft would b6 permitted to fly in Canada
under the existing conditions.
Th6 State Department acted upon these recommendations, and
as a result the Canadian Government has extencled its courtesies to American pilots and tiircraft until June 1, 1921. The entire inciclent, however, serves to emphasize the need for Federal
legislation for the regulation of air navigation, as recommended in another part of this report.
INTERNATIONAL

CONVENTION

ON AIR NAVIGATION.

During the past year the committee has giveg consideration to a number of questions
dealing with the subject of international air navigation referred to it by the State Department,
and in each case has submitted its recommendations to the State Department,
The questions
considered by the committee have been mainl~ those arising uncler the pending international
Convention on Air Navigation and a few miscellaneous questions in r6gard to the general
subject of international air navigation.
In regard to the Convention on International
Air Navigation, the committee formulated
aIJ recommended to the State Department
d
reservations which were accepted by the department
and communicated as instructions to the American” ambassador to France for his official notation
at the tinw of signing the convmt.ion preliminary to ratification by the Government of the
United States.
The ~mmittee
has also considered reservations formulated by Canada and
submitted recommendations
to the State Department as to concurrence and nonconcurrence
therewith on the part of the United States.
CIVIL USE OF GOVERNMENT

LANDING FIELDS.

ln June, 1920, the Aeronautical
Board sought” the advice of the committee as to the
governmental policy to be followed in regard to the question of permitting the use of Government landing fields and facilities by private or comme.rclal aircraft.
The meeting at which
this subject was discussed was held at Langley FieIcl, Tra., in connection with the formal openi~g of the La@ey Memorial Aeronautical I/aboratory, at -which many persons prominent in
aeronautical development
were present, a number of wh( im had flown to the field from
Wwhington
and more distant places.
ThG committee at that meeting adopted a resolution stating that, ‘(It is the sense of the
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics that each governmental agency having airdromes
or landing fields under its jurisdiction should be authorized by law to furnish to owners or
operators of private or commercial aircraft, Ianding on or near such airdromes or landing
fields, aviation fuel, oiI, supplies, and necessary mechanical assistance at cost plus 10 per cent,

A222TCJAL
FWF’OET! ATIONAL
N

19

ADVISORY COMMTTZEE FOR AEEONAUTTOS.

under such reguhitions and restrictions as may be approved from time to time by the heads
of the departments concerned ;“ and that ‘t Private or canmercia~ aircraft should not be allowed
to use Government airdromes or landing fields as home stations, and that only mecha~ical
asistance or repairs of an emergenc~ ~ature shouId be furnished at Government airdromes or
landing fields, such as are necessary-to permit an aircraft to resume its journey.”
These principles have been embodied in a draft of proposed legislation for the reguktion
of air navigation, referred to in another part of this report.
PROTECTION

OF AIRCRAFT

INllUSTRT

FROM UNFAIR FOREIGN COMPETITION.

A bilI was introduced in the House of 17epresentatives during the last session by Representative T~son, ~om
as the <f nti-dump~g
a
b~’> [H. R. 14287) , the principal object Of
which was the prevention of unfair foreign competition in the sale of airplanes imported into
the United States. At the time there -was some question as to the facts in the matter, the merits
After the adjournment of Congress, the bill not
of the bill, and the need for such Iegidation.
having been passed, the committee recommended to the Secretary of Commerce that the Bureau
of Foreign and Domestic Commerce be authorized to make a thorough in-restigatiori with a
vie-w to determining all the facts bearing upon the advisability of the proposed legislation~ in
order that the Secretary of Commerce might be able to present to Congress at its next s&on
the facts as determined by the investigation, together with hie recommendations.
This the Secretary of Commerce, under date of June 21, 1920, agreed to do.
13
EVELOP}IENT

OF RIGI13 AIRSHIPS.

The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics at the semiannual meeting of the full
committee had under consideration the question of the development of rigid airships, which
&e committee considers essentiaI for our national defense. The Army and Xaq had agreed that
until standard types were developed in this country, the work of development should rest with
the ~avy.
The proper development of this type of aircraft for military purposes will unquestionably lead to the de-i-elopment of commercial types, but it is felt that the Gov-ernment muss
take the lead by &t developing rigid airships for military purposes.
The committee at that time submitted a special report to the President recommending that
adequate provision be made in the then pending naval appropriation bill for the construction
of rigid airships and suitabIe hangarsl and that a continuing building program for this type
of aircraft be authorized, extending over a period of y-ears. The committee at. this time reiterates this recommendation,
importance
military

and expresses

to the effectiveness
and

naval

its belief

of the Army

—

that th~ e~erimental

development

is of vital

and N’avy in time of war, and particularly

air services as combatant

to the

arms.

PRODUCTION OF IIELIU3L
At the semiannual meeting of the full committee, hekl in ApriI, 1920, consideration was
given to the question of the produc.t.ion of helium. Helium has such advantages over any other
known gas as to make its use imperative for military and naval airships in time of war, provided it can be made available in sufficient quantity.
In letters to the Secretary of War, the
Secretary of the Navy> and the Secretary of the Interior, the committee stated that it is necessary to encourage the economical production of helium in order that an increased demand may
bring about a greater increase in the supply, a simplitlcation of the processes of extraction, and
a lessening of the cost of production.
The committee especially invited their attention to the
necessity for thoroughly investigating
all sources from which helium may be extracted or
seeured~ and recommended that every practicable effort be made both to increase production and
to decrease cost, having due regard for conservation of the sources of supply for military
purposes.

-

.

20

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMTTTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

EDUCATION IN ADVANCED AERONAUTICAL

ENGINEERING.

At the semiannual meeting of the fu~l committee in April, 1920, consideration was given
to the question of education in advanced aeronautical engineering.
This meeting was attended
by all the members of the committee connected with universities: Drs. Ames, Durand, Hayford,
and Pupin, and it is deemed worthy of speciaI notice that each of these members individually
expressed his approval of the resolution which was adopted at that meeting in the following terms:
Whereas it is deexnti essential to the development of aviation in America for military and naval purposes
that advanced instruction in aeronautical engineering be given to military and naval officers at-a competent educational institution; and

Whereas the public demand for such instruction will in cdl prohability not be ticient
to justify or permit
the offering of such advanced courses in more than one institution at the present time; and
Whereas such an advanced course Is now being given at the Massachm%tts Institute of Technology; and
Whereas it is deemed further essential that actual experience with aerodynamic research should form. a part
of such advanced instruction: Therefore be it
Resolved, That the National Advisory Cotumittee for Aerormutics he~eby recommends to the Secretary
of War and to the Secretary of the Navy the adoptjon of a continuing policy for the instruction of officers
in advanced aeronautical engineering, and that for the next- three years classes of 15 .4rmy officers and 15
Navy officers be detaiIed annually to take such instmction in advanced aeronautical engineering at the
Masmchusetts Institute of Technology at. the expense of the War and h“a~y Departments, respectively.
Resolved fwtlter, That, in connection with the course in ad~anced tieronauticaI engineering, the Nntional
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics cooperate in every way with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
by offering to its faculty and students the facilities for investigations in aerodynamics and experimental
work on actuaI airplanes at the committee’s research lahorntory, Langley Field, Va.
Resoked ~tirther, That the National Advisory ~ommittee for Aeronautics offerto give at various eWineering universities courses of Iectures in ~dvanced aeronautical engineering by members of its engineering Staff.
Resotzied farther, That the National Advisory Committee for ‘Aeronautics recommend that educational,
institutions generally not consider the estabolishment of courses in aerontiuticsd e~gineerbcg at the present
time, as it is the opinion of the committee that the demand for such instruction outside of the (government
service is not sufficient, and competent instructors for such courses are not available.

This resolution was transmitted to the Secretary of War and to the Secretary of the Navy.
The War Department, acting on the committee’s recommendation,
secured the necessary authority from Congress to detail 25 oilicers for speciaI instruction at the Massachusetts lnstituk
of Technology.
It is understood that the Navy has not secured similar authority.
The comthai similar
authority be given for the
mittee therefore strongly recommends to congress
detail of naval officers for such special training.
At the present time both services are weak
in respect to the number of officers sufl~ciently educated in aeronautical engineering.
The committee considers that the diligent prosecution of a cent inuing program of education will be of
great value within a few years in the development of military and naval aviation.
..

NOMENCLATURE

FOR AERONAUTICS.

The N“ational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, to secure uniformity
with reference
to aeronautical terms in official documents of the Governmentv and, so far as possible, in
technica~ and other commercia~ publications,
has. prepared z report on nomenclature
for
aeronautics, in classified and dictionary forms: and including a list of symbols used. This
for
report was issued during the past year under the title “ Report No. 91, Nomenclature
H supersedes Report No., 25, on the same subject, which app~arecl in the
Aeronautics.”
Fourth Annual Report of the committee.
The subcommittee on aerodynamics had charge of’ the preparation of the nomenclature
for aeronautics, and was materially assisted by the Interdepartmental
Conference on Aeronautical Nomenclature and S~mbols, which was especially orgmizeil by the executive committee, with the approval of the War and Navy Departments, for the purpose of giving proper
representations to all technical divisions of the Arm-y Air Service and the burtx~us of the hTavy
Department,

,

&NITGAL REPOET NATION&

ADTTSOEY COMMITCTEEFOE AERONAUTICS.
,

21

The first meeting of the interdepartmenta~
conference was held On October 23, 1919; the
second meeting! on January 15, 1920, at which meeting the nomenckkure
was unmimously
approved and recommended to the subcommittee on aerodynamics
with the reservation that
stability terms and power plant terms be gi~en further and special consideration.
The stability terms were accordingly referred for special consideration to Messrs. E. B.
Wilson. J. C. I&maker,
A. F. Zahm, Ill. P. N’arner, ancl H. Bateman, and the power plant
terms were referred to the subcommittee on power plants for aircraft.
The complete report
was adopted by the subcommittee on aerodynamics on 31arch 8; 1920, anti recommended to
the executive committee for approval and publication.
Upon recommendation
of the subcommittee
on aerodynamics, the executi~e committee
of the Nrational ~d-i-kory Committee approved the nomenclature for publication as a technical
report on April 1, 1920.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

OF AERONAUTICS.

During the past year, the committee has continued the bibliography
of aeronautics.
The
fi~t -work on this subject -was prepared by Mr. Paul Brockett, of the Smithsonian Institution,
of aeroancl included the period up to 1910. The committee has prepared a biblio~aphy
nautics from 1910 to 1916 k one ~olume, and a bibliobwaphy for. the years 1917, 19181 and 1919
h= been prepared in one voh.nne. The bibliography for each year in the future ti
be prepared
armualIy.
DISTRIBUTION

OF METEOROLOGICAL

INFORMATION

E+YlVIRELESS.

The State Department, under date of June 5, 1920, referrecl to the committee for consideration and recommendation
a copy of a note from the British ambassador, together with a
copy of a report from an international commission -which had been considering methods for
the distribution
of meteorological information
by wireless telegraphy under the provisions
of article 35 and Annexe G of the proposed Con-rention on International Air Na-&ation.
After consideration of this question at two meetings the committee reported to the Secretary of State that the proposal as submitted b~ the British ambassador appeared to be satisfactory in general, but that it wouhl be impractwable to carry out the enhire program in detail,
the principal dificulty
centering around the proposal to take observations at hours corresponding to 1, 7, 13, and 19 Greenwich mean time. At the present time observations are
taken in the TJnited States onIy at hours correspond~~
to 1 and 13 G. ~f. T. After taking
up the matter with the Navy Departmeriti the committee
in its special report, also recommended that AnnapoIis be designated as the station for the dissemination
of such reports
for liorth America.
SEROLOGICAL

~ORK

OF THE TVi3ATHER BUREAU.

Al the reb@ar meeting of the executive committee of the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics held on December 1S, 1919, consideration -was given to the increasing needs
of aviation for improvements
and extensions in the making of meteorological observations
in the free air, and the issuance of forecasts and ~arnings for the promotion of safety, of
aerial navigation over the land and the oceans. Work of this character was at that t.ne
being conducted by the Weather Bureau under an appropriation
of $100,000, -which was
originally ~granted by Congress in 1917 upon the recommendation
of the hTational Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics.
The organic act defining the duties and functions of the Weather Bureau clearly required
of local meteorological observations by the Army
it to perform this service. The mahg
at certain military posts and by the %vy at base stations and aboard ships was necessmy
for local needs and obtiated the maintenance by the Weather Bureau of stations at these
points which would otherwise have been necessary.

22

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COE11119XEE
EOR AERONAUTICS.

The executive committee accordingly authorized the submission of a special report to
the Committee on Agriculture of the House of-Representatives
in which the committee stated
that there was no duplication of work or expenditure in these activities, the work of the
Army and Navy in this connection being wholly supplementary
and complementary
to that
of the Weather Bureau, their observations being t-elegraphed to the Weather Bureau daily
for its use in conjunction with reports from over 200 stations of its own. In this specia]
report the executive committee strongly recommended the ~ppropriation of additional funds
by Congress tu extend this feature of the Weather Bureau’s activities in order to meet the
requirements of aviation and to safeguard lives and property engaged in aerial navigation.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AERODYNAMICS.
FoI1owing
dynamics:

is a statement

of the orga~ization

and functions

of the committee

cm aero-

ORGANIZATION.

Dr. John F. Hayford, Northwestern University, chairman.
Dr. Joseph S. Ames, Johns Hopkins UniiZrsity, vice chairman.
Maj. T. H. Bane, United States Army.
Dr. L. J. 13riggs, Bureau of Standards.
Maj. V. E. C1ark, United States Army.
Commander J. C. Hunsaker, United States Navy.
Franklin L. Hunt, Bureau of Standards.
Prof. Charles F. Marvin, Chief Weather Bureau.
Edward P. Warner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, secretary.
Dr. A. F. Zahm, United States N’aw.
FUNCTIONS.

1. To aid in determining the problems relating to the theoretical and experimental study
of aerodynamics to be experimentally
attacked by governn~entaI and private agencies.
2. To endeavor to coordinate, by counsel and suggestion, the research and experimental
work involved in the investigation of such problems.
3. To act as a medium for the interchange of information regarding aerodynamic investigations in progress or proposed,
4. The committee may direct and conduct research and experiment in aerodynamics in such
laborato~ or laboratories as may be placed (either in whole or in part) under its direction.
5, The committee shall meet from time to time on call of the chairman! and report its
actions and recommendations
to the executive committee.
The committee on aerodynamics, by reason of the representation
of the Bureau of
Standards, the Army, the Navy, technioal institutions,
and the industry, is in close contact
with aerodynamical research and development–-wor> being carried on in the United States.
Its representation enables it, by-counsel and suggestion, to coordinate the experimental research
work involved in the investigation of’ aerodynamiczd proldems, and to influence the direct ion
of the proper expenditure of energy toward those problems which seem of greatest importance.
The committee has direct control of aerodynamicaI research conducted at the Langley
Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory and also directs propeller research conducted at Lelmd
Stanford Junior University under the supervision of Dr. W. F. Durancl, and through its
membership it keeps in close touch with the work being carried on at the Bureau of Stanclards,
at McCook Field by the engineering division of the _Army Air Service, and at the Washington
E
Navy Yard by the Bureau of Construction and Repair, United States Navy,
Two new wind tunnels have been completed and put in operation in the LJnited States
within the past year. A. new 5-foot wind tunnel at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical
Laboratory has gone into service and has already run at speeds slightly in excess of 110, miles
per hour. lt is anticipated that -speeds of 140 miles per hour will be attained with a nwiv

-

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL AD+ISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
propeller
The

which

other

corporation
The

a manner

commitie

~ity

to obtain
that

results

~eneraI
three

for the coming

to the

the

year

characteristics

is that

and is of the true Eiffel
in directim~
a detite
adopted

cofines

conclusions
general

andj

problems

motor

Curt&

between

as determined
The

of certain

vvork at the ~ar@ey
to research

the -work to three general

use: experiments
general

the

Work

problems,

are to be conducted

theories
of

the
from

committee

will

existing

small

stabilit~

of

calcula~ions
endeavor

airplanes,

oscillations

maneuverability
of

airplanes,
based

the

may

result

and,

in such

from

aerodynamical

as determined

on vvind tunnel

to deiermirie

and attempt

them.

laboratory

—

from

full-fight,

is not

available

the rnaneuverabfity

wind tunnel
comparison

of

will

vvith

and

to airplane
airplanes

peculiarities

for these by calculations

full-scale

follo-iv,

test

measurements.

the characteristics

to account

arid its verification

and contro~ability

the art there

dicting
from
Stiar

~lemorial

work to be con-

on wind ~
tunnel work.
The matter of control
-w!l also fall under
The fist work conducted
will probably
be confined to the e~lanation
of

employed.

Engineering

—

with reference

if possible;
covering

e~ectric
the

type.

policy

The policy

the
by

the research

has adopted

-which wiLl be of ge.nerzl

of

constructed

year have been adopted:

Comparison
and

suited
of

on aerodynamics,

Laboratory,

following
(a)

tunnel

at this laboratory.

in order
The

wind

at Garden

Aeronautical
ducted

TVfi be better

new

23

work

hter,

based

this heading.
of the theory
a study

as it is felt that in the present
designers

from

the

a rational

drawings

of

method
the

of

airplanes

of

state
precm

experiments
vvith models.
between the performance

of airplanes
f-uKscale
and the calcuIatiorw based on wind tunnel experiments.
A great deal of attention has been given by the British to the prediction of
performance based on aerodynamic dzta, but there is stiu a gap betwe~ model .
and full-scale results which can not be bridged until we have more information.
The performance is intimately connected with the propeller, an! it is the intention
of the committee to have all propeller research conducted at ;he A=erodynamical
Laboratory
of Leland Stanford
Junior University
under the direction of Dr.
Durand.
Am effort will be made to tie in the results obtained at LeJand Stanford
with the performance
work being done at Langley
Field.
Experiments
will
also be conducted on models of weL1-known airplanes to better understand the
landing and starting characteristics of airplanes and to determine exactly what
it is that makes certain airpIanes require a long run.
(c) General aerofoti problem, includiig
controI surfaces, with particular reference to
thick sections an-d combi&ations an-d moditlcations of such sections
The committee is to undertake a systematic investigation
of thick wing sections, after a thorough analysis of what has been done in this matter, and to
duplicate some of the experiments
already performed.
After the determination
of what. properties of thick wing sections are of interest% -work -will then be carried
along -with a view to systematic variation of the variables which determine the
aerodynamic properties of a series. Determination
wiIl also be made of the relation between aerodynamic properties of such standard aerofoils and aerofoik of
simiIar profi~e but of different aspect ratio and taper. It is also desirable to know
bipIane and other interference effects -when the aerofoils are used in combination.
A careful stucly will also be made of recent -work, by -which it appears possible to
predict from a knowledge of the lift coefficient the properties of aerofoils in
combination and of diflerent aspect ratio, as well as the influence of a boundary.
Such problems arising in con~ection -with the Army and h~avy programs of development
—
as fit in logically with the above program vrfil be referred to the committee on aerodynamics,
and the research work covering the problems -will be conducted at the LangIey Memorial
Aeronautical Laboratory.
(~)

.
..

.—
.

24

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CKiMMITTEEFOR AERONAUTICS.

At the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory a large number of experiments have
been carried on with model wind tunnels in the past -year tO determine the best form for
steadiness of flow ancl efficiency of operation.
The effect of various shapes of cones, experimental chambers, and types of prgpellerst honeycombs, and diffusers were thoroughly studied.
A special recording air-speed meter and recording ya~ meter were designed in order to study
the steadiness of flow, and it was found that the tunnel with a continuous throat was superior
to the open or Eiflel type of tunnel both in efficiency and steadiness of flow. It was also
demonstrated that a honeycomb placecl in the. entrance cone is of the greztmt value in straight.
ening the air ffow~ but a diffuser placed in the return circuit was apparently of little vaIue.
The National Advisory
Committee’s 5-foot wind tunnel was completed in the spring
of 1920 and has been in continuous operation since. This tunnel is designed from the data
obtained in the model experiments and is very satisfactory both in efficiency and steadiness
of flow. The 10-foot four-bladed propeller iS Ckiven b; a 200-horsepower variable-speed
electric motor. ‘The power for this motor is obtained from gasoline-driven
generating sets,
and the control system is very convenient, the motor being started and ,stopped simply by
pushing a button in the experimental chamber, and the speed being controlled by a rheostat
from the same place.
The balance used in this tunnel js of-the modified N. P. L. type, and was constructed in
the shop of the National Advisory Committee at Langley Field. UnIike the usuaI baIan~e.
the weight is supported on a ball bearing socket, rlther th~n a Conica] pi~ot; ns this device
considerably reduces the friction and will carry a much Iarger load. It is also possible with
this baIance to simultaneously read the Iift. clrag, and pitching moment.
.&s the N. P. L. type
of balance is not suited to holdlng tapered wings, and as ~ Iarge amount of work of this kind
is planned for the future? a simple wire type of balance is being constructed at the present
time, similar to that used in the wind tunnel at G6ttingen.
It has been the practice in the past -when setting Up a. mode] to align the chord of the
wing with the -wind by placing a thin wooden batten on the wing and comparing this batten
with a straight line on the floor of the tunnel.
But M this method is rather laborious
ancl inaccurate: a new type of aligning apparatus has been designed for this tunneI, consisting essentially of a mechanism for reflecting m beam of light from a phtin mirror which is
attached parallel to the chord of the wing! so that by rotating the wing the reflected beam of
iight is brought to a cross line on a small target on the side of the experimental chamber.
In this -iva~ a -wing can be linecl up with an accuracy of o.010 in a very few seconds. -b the
air speeds used i’n this -wind tunnel are considerably higher than those usu;lly encountered,
a special type of manometer was constructed to obviate the necessity of having an extremely
long inclined tube. This gauge changes the he~d of Iiquid and at the same time the inclintition of the tube, so that the fluctuations of the liquid are approximately
equal at any speed.
A multiple manometer h~s also been constructed for pressure distribution work on moclels,
containing 20 glass tubes, the inclination of which can be adjusted to any desired angle.
A thorough investigation has been made of the problem of spindle interference and the
best manner of protecting the spindle by a fair~~’ater. Different t~Tpes and lengths of ftiir-water were tested in order to determine -which condition wonld give the least total interference.
An accurate determination
of the eiE’ective resistance of the spinclle was made for various
Iengths of-spindIe and for various air speeck so that a complete set of data is available for use
on any model tests for the future. In ordef to provide data for stability calculations ~ wing
was tested through an angle of 360°1 and 8 modeI of an airplane was tested in the same way.
In order to determine the scale corrections for model airplanes a model of the JN4H was
constructed with great accuracy, and d] details of the airplane were reproduced in the moclel,
including the racliator and motor, but the wires -wer-e omitted as it–-was thought that their
resistance COUICI e determined better from tests of the fulI-sized wires. This model was
b
tested at speeds of 30, 60, and 90 miles per hour in order to determine the corrections that
must be applied to it in order to give the fuII-tlight performance which was carefulIy determined on the fuII-sized umchine.

q

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY cOMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

25

FREE FLIGHT.

The machines avaiIabIe for the committee’s use at the Langley Memorial A.eronauticaI
Laboratory consist of two ~T4H training machines ancl one DH4. During the summer the
machines ha~e been in the air about 60 hours. Numerous small changes ha~e been made on
these machines during the different tests, including chan=ging the sta~ger, ehan=ti~ the angle
of the tail plane,
front

constructed
for
have

and changing

at Langley

obtaining

the loads

the position

of the center

.k larg~ number

or rear of the fuselage.
Flelcl

for research

orL an airplane

of special

in full
during

flight.
stunts

of gravity
instruments

by addfi~

.$n accelerometer
find landings,

wei~ht

at, the

ha~-e been designecl
and

and

has been deYeloped
satisfactory

results

been obtained

by other

types

-with it, which are of considerably
greater accuracy
than those. obtained
Instruments
were also de~eloped
for recor@~
the position
of instruments.

of and the force on all three controls of the airplane,
-with these instruments.
For obtaining
the pressnre

and valuable results ha-re been obtained
distribution
on the tail of the full-sized

tubes, all
of which couId be photo=~aphecl at one time by an automatic fi~ camera placed in the fuselage.
As this instrument -will only determine accurately the pressure distribution in steady flight.,
another manometer is now being constructed consisting Of a large n~ber
of small diaphragm
gauges -which wilI record continuously on a me-ring mm so that the rise and fail of the pressure
at various points on the tail surfaces can be -rwordecl during any stunt maneuver.
An air-speed meter and yaw meter ha-re been co~tiructed, ~orting
on the opticaI recording principle} having the actual period of the fi=trl~ment Mgh and its friction smalI: so
that air-speed recorcls can be obtained of any small or high period fluctuations in the wind
in order to study
TO determine the angular rotation of the airp~ane during fl@t,
velocity.
its stability properties! a Icyrno=gaph was constructed consisting of a narrow slit which fo.
cused the image of the sun on moving bromide p~per~ and another i=tr~ent
of the same type
has been constructed -working on the gyroscopic principIe.
For obtaining the fulI-fliglit
Iift and drag coe3icient a special longitudinal
inclinometer
was conssructe~ which would
give a large sca~e defection and would be cormenient ancl accurate to rezd.
The investigations undertaken consist of the determination of the lift and drag coefficients
of the JNT4H in free flight> ancl it is folmc~ poxble by careful pfioting to flay the mac=hine a~ or
A thorough experimental
in-i-estimation has been made
slightly beyond the burble point.
of the static longitudinal stability of the airpIane and a great many factors have been altered
on the full-sized machine: such as changing the angIe of the tail planel changing the center
of gravity of.the machinel changing the section of the tail plane, and inclintig the angI~ of
the propeller axis. .+ study -was made of the angle of attack and the air speed at the wing
tips durin~ spins ancl loops. This was accomplished by placing -ranes and ail-speed meters at
the wing tips and photographing
them during the maneuver b-y means of a camera gun and
then plotting the cur-re of angle ancl speed against time from the photographs so obtained.
A -rery extensive investigation
of the pressure distribution
o-rer the tail of an airplane
The pressure at 110 points on the left and right hand
in free flight has been undertaken.
sides of the tail have been taken independently
and the total pressure determined from these
two curwis. By means of photographic recording methods the time taken for making this
investigation in the air is brief, but the computation and plotting of the results are laborious
Runs w-ere made with three positions of the
and require a long time for their completion.
center of gravity and two angIes of setting of the stabilizer, as well as one run -with celluloid
over the crack between the stabilizer and the ele~ator. In all cases the pressure found over
the tail was extremeIy low and in steacly flight the load on the tail -WOUICI found very smal~
be
A. large number of recor~ ha~e
compared with the loacl resulting from accelerated flight.
been taken with the recording accelerometer designecl by the hr. -A. C. A., these recorcIs being
taken in the JNT4H and se-reraI other machines during Tarious stunts and lanclings.
It was
found that the maximum acceleration experienced in any stunt -was during a roll, where the
acceleration reached a maximum of 4.2 g. In order to determine the characteristics of an
airplane during circling flight a record of the forces on aIl three controls was made doing
banks of various angles up to 60° and side slips up to 20° of yaw.
machine

a speciaI

multiple

manometer

was constructed

ha~in~

110 glass

manometer

26

,

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORi COMMITTEE FOR AERONAU!EtCS.

The wind tunneI at Leland Stanford Junior Univwsity
has again been occupied entirely
with propeller tests. The results of the research work conducted this year are contained iu
technical report No. 109. Preparations are being made for tests on propellers at large angles
of yaw, which will give data for the analysis of helicopters traveling horizontally.
Dr. George de Bothezat, aerodyn~mical expert of the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics, has carried on at McCook Field, -with the cooperation of the Engineering Division of the Army Air Service, a speciaI investigation
for the measurement of aerodynamic
performance.
The report orI this investigation has been completed and approved as technical
report No. 97: entitled “ General Theory of the Steady Motion of an AirpIane.”
This
investigation
involved the design and construction of a new type of barograph.
Also in
connection with his investigation
of airpIane performance, Dr. de Bothezat has designed a
torque meter and R rate-of-climb meter, which are under construction.
The torque meter is
a very simple design, ancl pr&ent- indications are that it will be a most serviceable and
The rate-of=climb meter is not based on a new principle; it is simply
efficient instrument.
a new construction and design embodying the experience obtained in the use of other in%ruments.
The research work conducted by the Bureau of_Constru@i.on and Repair of the Navy
Department is carried on at the aerodynamical laboratory of the Washington
Navy l’arcl
and at the naval aircraft fzctory, Plfiadelphia
Navy Yarcl. At the 7fTashington hTa~y Yard
two wind tunnels are in operation. and cluring the year a large number of airplanes and
seaplane mo&Is have been given routine tests! and tests on many new aerofoil sections have
also been made. Special attentiori has been given to testing streandine forms and struts.
Yawing tests were conducted on the El? ancl the IE envelopes, -which are formed from mathematical curves and ha-re very Io-w resistance.
The tests indicate that the yawing moment
about the center of gravity of x bwe streamlined form ~aries but little from one shape to
another.
In connection with the tests on struts. it was shown that the h“avy 1 strut has
approximately
15 per cent less resistance than that given for the “ Best” strut by the
National Physical Laboratory.
Wincl tunneI tests were also conducted on two airship cars,
one of faired contour and the other with facets of the same general contour, the results of
which show the gre~t vaIue of fairing-. The resistance of the faired cm was 15 per cent less
than that of the unfaired.
In connection with the wind tunneI at the Washington
Navy Yard, a new aeroc~ynamic
The balance is so desigmed that all adjustments
balance of great interest has been developed.
of weights to bring the baIance into equilibrium are automatic, and the time required for testing and the number of skiIled operators are thus much decreased.
The Bureau of Construction and Repair has aIso undertaken the development and construction of the following instruments:
A precision recording barograph intended for use in airplane trials, and especially for
measuring the landing angle of airp]anes~ for which no wincl tunnel test is available.
This instrument wiIl have a range of from O to 5,000 feet, and will incorporate the
desirable features of the present Bureau of Standards precision altimeter,
Two thermometer altimeters and density indicators.
These instruments -will combine
a thermometric element with a pressure element in stlch a manner as to show at all
times the altitude corrected for temperature.
Two instruments intencled to measure quantit~~tiveIy the permeability
of gas cells of
enveiopes without the removal of samples. The construction of these instruments
has been suggested by the technical staff of the Bureau of Standarcls.
This instrument is to take the fo~m of a cup Oi suitable area which is pressed against the envelope at the point where the permeability is to be determined.
A current of air is
either sucked or driven through the cup, s-weeping i~ out at a known rate. The
mixture of gas and air from the cup is then passed through a thermaI conductivity
cell, and the proportion of hydrogen contained in the mixture is determined from
the thermal cotiductivity of the mixture.

AiTNUAL RETORT XATION’AL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

27

In the high-speed wind tunnel at McCook Field, which is operated under the direction of
the technical staff of the Army Air Service, work has been continued along the same general
lines as those indicated in technical report Xo. 83. During the year it is contemplated that
tests will be conducted to determine the flow around a sphere and arormd biplane combinations.
It is hoped thus to determine how nearly the action of the visible vtpor particles indicate the
true air flow about a body? and to visualize the flow around combinations of more than one
supporting surface w as to determine the nature of the interference between the upper and
lower surfaces should be of the greatest inte-rest. It is also hoped to photograph the ~apor
action about a sphere over as large an air-speed range as possible. ‘The sphere is to be supported in a manner to produce a minimum disturbance due to the support, and the photographs
obtained are to be compared with existing photographs of flow about spheres and with the
theoretical .Areamlines.
It is aIss hoped that tests will be conducted to determine the effect of rake and tapered
wing tips, on air flow, as this inf ormakion may mxke it possible to further improve the airpkme
form and nature of taper in wings.
Performance tests are also conducted at McCook Field, and the committee on aerodynamics
has requested that special tests be made on longitudimd
stability to obtain an index of the
dynamic longitudinal stability of the various airplans wed by tbe .Lrmy. The work already
done by the staff of the ~aiional Adfiory
committee
for Aeronautics at Dayton with the
cooperation of the ~ngineefig
Ditision of the Air Service on five airplanes is but a beginniig
It is desirable to obtain readings of stick forces and
of longitudinal stabiIity investigation.
elavator angles on every type of mach~e ~ the A-IIZOY’S
pos~+on,
and to have curves plotted
in the same way as in National Advisory Committee’s report No. 96.
The invessigatio~
carried on at the ~RO fid
tunnels of the BWXMU of Standards under
the direction of Dr. L J. BrkG have consisted largely ~ tiirmenk
calibration and testing.
The principal research has been b co~ection fith t~~eresistance of spheres ancl projectiles.
‘The work of the Aeronautic ~trnments
~ection Of the B~lreau of Standards comprises the
investigation
experimental development? and testing Of aircraft ~strments;
also the development of methods of tes@zY fidam~tal
research~ ODthe physical principles invohii
in such
instruments, and the study of their beha~ior in a~tual service.
The more important kv=~igatio=
which ha~e been ~dertaken
by the section during the
past year are as follows:
An investigation has been completed and prepared for publication through the National
ACLvisory Committee for Aeronautic
on the effect on the performance of Yenturi tube awThe results show that in certain instruspeed indicators of changes in atmospheric pressure.
ments commonly used a correction shotid be applied for the viscosity of the air, a factor which
has not hitherto been taken into account. This is of special interest in dirigibIe work where
the air speeds may be lo-w, and also in aircraft performance tests where exceptional” precision
is required.
An altimeter of exceptional accuracy designed and made at the Bureau of Standards has
Anothei modeI with additional improvements has
been completed and submitted to the Army.
recently been designed and is under construction.
At ihe request of the hTational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics a fundamental inw&igation of the factors determtig
the b~atior
of flexible diaphraaas used in aeronautic
The irre-i-ersible effects which cause the lag in cliaphraagm
instrumen~s has been undertaken.
The relation between force and deflection
instruments has been formulated mathematically.
for diaphragms of different sizes, thiclmess: and materials has been studied graphically, practica~ methods for spinning diaphra=as and building up diaphragm boxes have been invest~gated, and the possibilities of mechanical seasoning by repezted stress considered.
An improved rate of climb indicator, which indicates directly the rate of climb of aircraft in hundreds of feet per minute, has been completed and tested, and spetications
have
been prepared for the Arm-y to Use in the manufacture of a number of these instruments.

.

. ..

.28

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COKMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICH3.

Information
regarding instruments
avaihtble for aeria~ navigation in cloudy weather
or at night or for long-distance flights has been compiIecl at the request of the N“atioiml Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
and the Air Mail Service by the Aeronautic Instruments
~S
ecticm. ‘lThis work will be continued and the development of new instruments undertaken.
Other investigations have been the deve~opment o!. a motion-picture apparatus for recordiug instrument readings during the flight of an airplane ; a study of the errors in in#ruments used for determining the direction of aircraft, such as gyroscopic and liquid ‘inclinome~ers and banking indicators, gyroscopic nnd magnetic co~passes and turn indicators, a
systematic investigation of commercial sphygmoma~l ometers; a paper on the resuIts of investi.gatlons on German instruments;
a statistical study of the causes of faih-tre in aeronautic
instruments.
Assistance has been given the Air Service, the Aero Club of America, and others interested during the past year in the world’s altitude competition for airplanes.
Instruments
have been calibrated and the best procedure for determining the altitude attained formulated.
REPORT OF COMMKTTEE ON POIVER PLANTS FOR AIRCRAF’T.
FolIowing is a statement
plants for aircraft:

of the organization

ancl functions

of the committee

on power

ORGANIZATION.

—

Dr. S. W. Stratton, chairman.
Commander A. K. Atkins, United States Navy, ‘vice chziirman.
Henry M. Crane, Wright Aeronautical Corporation.
Harvey N. Davis, Harvard University.
Dr. H. C. Dickinson, Bureau of Standards, acting secretary,
L. M. Griffith, Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory.
Capt. G. E. A, Hallett, Unitecl States Army.
G. W, Lewis, Natiomd Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
J. G. Vincent, Packard Motor “Car Go.
FUNCTIONS.

I.. To aid in determining the probIems WIating to power plants for aircraft to be experimentally attacked by governmental and private agencies.
2. To endeavor to coordinate, by counsel and suggestion, “tie research and experimental
work involved in the investigation of such problems.
3. To act as a medium for the interchange-of information
regarding aeronautic powerplant investigations in progress or proposed.
4. The committee may direct and conduct research and experiment on aeronautic powerpiant problems in such laboratory or laboratories, either in whole or in part, as may be placed
under its direction.
5. The committee shaIl meet from time to time on call of the chairman and report its
actions and recommendations to the executive committee.
By reason of the representation of the Army, the Navy, and the industry upon this subcomnmttee, it has been possible to maintain close contact with the research and development
being carried on in thjs country and to exert an influence to-ward the expenditure of energy on
those problems whose solution appears of the greatest importance, as well as to avoid waste
due to unnecessary repetition of research. The activities of this committee can be advantageously considered under the following main classes. of problems relating to aircraft power
plants:
iNew engine types.

Performance characteristics of a!rcraft engines.
Supercharging compressors.
Improvement of engine details.
Cooling problems.
.Radiating systems.
Carburetion systems,

Ignition systems.
Fuels and combustion.
Lubricants and lubrication,
Cylinder pressure indicators.
Miscellaneous problems.
Extension of laboratory facilities.

—

AIINUAL REPORT NATTONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

29

NEW ENGINETYPES.
owing to the disadvantages of high fire risk, high fuel cost, carburetion ancl i=gnition difficulties. low service reliability, and specific power limitation of the four-cycle engine, constantly increasing interest has bee~ shown in the fuel injection engine of both automatic and
electric ignition types. The two-cycle fuel injection automatic ignition engine appears especially promising.
The probIems incident thereto are being energetically studiecl abroad and
some work is being done in this country.
In particulcm, the Bureau of Engineering
of the
Navy Department has recently approvecl a fuel injection research proagrzm ~0 be carried out
at the Langley Jfemorial Aeronautical Laboratory> as the de~elopment I& a successful engine
of the fuel injection type is of especial interest to the Nravy in connection with the power
pkmts

of large airships.

The program for the immediate future covers the study of the phenomena of fuel injection by means of a sp~ial glass-wa~ec~ pressure chamber, ~ which many of the engine operating conditions may be sim~atecl, equipped ]~ith apparatus for taking very high-speed photographs of the events occurring in the pressure chamber. The results are to be applied to an
experiment al engine and a study made of the possibilities of the double-piston t-we-cycle engine
in this connection,
The probIem of altering stanclard carbureted four-cycle ergi.nes will
receive attention as well.
The direct air-cooled engine offers important possible advantages which have been stu~ed
by foreign laboratories and to a small extent by those in this country, largely in connection
with the generzl problem of radiation.
In connection with direct. fuel injection, the air-cooled
engine is especia~y interest.i~r as looking toward the increase of thermal efficiency and the
reduction of engine -weight.
The program provides for the continuation
of the research into the problem of direct
transfer of heat. from cylinder walls to air, ancl, if possible, the extension of the re.s.dts to
the deveIopmerit of efficient cyLinder forms.
The development of a radiaI engine of ~he air-cooIed type has recei~ed the serious attenIn this country very litkIe
tion of research laboratories of both Great Britain and France.
has so far been done along this line, but the Air Sertice of the Army at McCook FieId is
no-w undertaking
the problem, and at the present time is deve~oping at two outside laboratories radial air-cooled engines.
The Army Air Service has nearing completion an 18-cylinder engine of 600 to 700 horsepower.
The development of an-engine particularly suitable for a power unit for the operation of
lighter-than-air
craft is no-w being carried on by the hTavy Department.
To further this work
and obtain an engine of general characteristics, and still allow leeway for indi~iduzl design
of detaiI$ the Bureau of IG@neering has Iet contracts to three separate engine manufacturers.
The general specifications call for an engine with six cylinders in Erie, of approximately
300
horsepower, the main characteristics of which will be low fuel and oil consumption, together
One en@ne of this class being constructed is of the Ricardo
with a high degree of reliability.
type, as it is hoped that by the use of the Ricardo principIe of eonstr~lction the life aud reliability of the engine w-ill be greatly increased.
PERFOR?LMXCE CHARACTERISTICS OF AIRCRAFT ENGJXZS.

An investigation of the performance characteristics of aircraft en=gines, with special reference to conditions met -with in flight, is being carried on in the altitude chamber of the Bureau
of Standards.
The purpose of the investigation
is to secure information
to be used in the
selection of engines for specfic purposes! and in i-reproving the design of power p~an~. In
conducting this research work, observations of the “performance characteristics by means of
the altitude laboratory equipment were made to supply information
on a variety of subjects;
such observations -were made on a number of typical engines covering the following subjects:
(a) Conditions attendant upon supercharging
(with speciaI reference to Liberty engine).
(b) Study of indicated horsepower under altitude conditions.

30

ANNUAL REPORT hTATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
(c) &udy of relations between air to fuel ratio and maximum power at full and part
throttle,
(d) Effect of intake air temperature, jacket-water temperature, etc., on performance.
(e) Study of mechanical losses.
(f) Comparison of performance of different types of spark pIugs in operation.
SUPERCHARGING COMPRESSORS.

The GeneraI Electric exhaust turbine-driven
centrifugal compressor as developed by the
Air Service and Dr. S. k. Moss has been continuously perfected until it may be considered
as a proved device. It is, in fact, being orderecl in appreciable numbers for the equipment
of the Liberty–12 engine. The gain in power output at high altitudes is sut%cient to much
more than offset the added weight.
The Sturtevant
centrifugal-blower
t~pe, driven by gears and belt from the engine
crankshaft, has been developed so far as to demonstrate its value, and its app~ication to the
Liberty–12 is no-iv in progress. The gear-driven centrifugal compressor is being investkatecl
and the Air Service has partly developed a hydraulic ‘cIutch for tlie same to eliminate the
&estructive effect of the very high inertia of the rotor.
The positive gear-driven centrifugal-fan
type eliminates the high inertia forces by reason
of- the very low inertia of the rotor, This type was partially investigated by the engineering
division of the American Expetlitionary
Forces in Paris during the last months of the -war,
and its further investigation has been undertaken by this committee at Langley Field.
The postive blower of the Root type is also being stiidied by the committee at-tihe Langley
FieId laboratory, an experimental model having been built to supercharge the Liberty-12 up
to 20,000 feet altitude.
This device, as also the fan type above mentioned, are being subjected
to performance tests on the dynamometer and -will later be tested in flight if advisable.
The program of the committee for the immediate future involves the closest contact with
aII progress in this field, with a view to the early soIution of the problem of the most desirabIe
form of compressor and drive. The investigation
in our own laboratory will be pushed
forward as fast as possible consistent with accurate results.
IMPROVElrIENTOF ENGINE DETAILS.

Little research has been carried out during the past year under this head. Perhaps the
most important item is the study of the use of Monel metal for exhaust TVLIVeS,the results
of which indicate conclusively that this metaI has quite favorable thermal properties and is
on the whoIe weII adapted for this purpose,
Some work has also been done upon the effect
of varying width of exhaust-valve
seat upon the valve-head temperature.
The “ mercurycooIed” exhaust valve was developed by private laboratories and their conclusions have to a
certain extent been checked by other laboratories, indicating that this valve do~ maintain
a lower head temperature than the ordinary valve, provided the thermal capacity ~f the stem
and contacting guide is sufficient to transfer the heat which the mercury carries from the
exhaust-valve head to the stem. Some attention has aIso been “paid to the question Of reducing
the temperature of ~he piston head, although sufficient d_ata has not as yet been secured to
just@ a~y general concision.
The program for the future emphasizes the necessity for the energetic study of the piston
head temperature, inasmuch as this is likely to prove one of the limitations to the continuous
increase of brake mean effective pressure, and is of ~pecial importance in connection with the
two-cycle engine, Provision is also made for the continuation of the study of exhaust-valve
temperatures and the thermal resistance of such constructional expedients as threaded joints
in the combustion-chamber
walIs.
COOLING
PROBLEMS.
The problem including water cooling and direct-air cooling of aircraft engines has been
undertaken to complete the utiished
portion of the research on cooling radiators and tn

ANNUAL RRPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CO.XXCC~E FOR AERONAUTICS.
secure clata desired for the design of direct air-coo~ecl engines b-y means Of funrlameBtzl
tory

experiments,

mathemat.ic~l

to cheek the i!ore.goin~.

This

anal@s

of these

researches,

-work is to be undertaken

and observations

made

31
laborain fight

by—

Tesss of-new-designs of radiator cells as de~elop~d.
Study of heat and temperature distribution in mode~ air-cooled cyIinders by laboratory method and, in cylinders of erqjnes under operating con(ltions.
Pressure and temperature gradients in air tubes of radiators.
Mathematical anaiysis of results of the foregoing.
Flight tests of radiators of stanclard and speeiaI construction to verify laboratory and
mathematical study.
RADMTIOXS~ST~l&%
During the past year the testing of sample radiator cores has continued, together with
At the. same time the resuIts of previous
the application of the results to f ti-size radiators.
work in this fieId have been collated and pl~ced ti wch form as to be of direct v-alue to the
designing enagineer. The resuIts of research have to a large extent been checked by tests carried out by the Air Service at 31cCook Field.
The program provides for the continuation
of the testing of titerestk~
radiator core
samples, as -well as for the extension of the laboratory Work and the ~erfication of the fundaThe scientific de~elopment of the clirect air-cooled en=gine in reality comes
mental relations.
unc[er this same class, since the prolglems are quite simfiar LOthose of radiation hmolved in
the water-cooled enagine radiator, except that the temperatllre gradients are greatly iucreased.
The fundamental
data secured in the study Of water radiators is of the greatest ~alue in con;
nection -with the study of direct air-cooled engine cylincler.
CARJ3URlTHONYSTE?KS.
S

During the past year the problem of automatic carburetor compensation for altitude has
recei~ed additional study and some -work has been done in connection with its development in
free flight tests. Ho-we-w=, the gro~m
importance of the supercharger has to a certain exteni
A mathematical study has been made of the Iaws of
lessened the importance of this problem.
tlow of air and fuel in carburetors as affected by changes in altitudef and this is a-railable as
a foundation for the further de-i-e~opment of automatic or inherent compensation means. The
problems of the atomization and mixing characteristics of aircmft carburetors ha~e received
some additional experimental study, but the subject is so invol~ed that it has not as yet been
possibIe to de-relop any satisfactory foundation
for the scientific comparison of the experiThese probIems are interrelated to those of the
mental results from different carburetors.
optimum fuel to air ratios and the mocTify@g eflects of differing i.o.let manifold forms.
An
effort is being made to lzy a proper foundation for the study of all of these problems, and it
is beIieved that fundamental
information will shortly be a-railabIe. The data yielded by the
te+hg of aircraft engines in the a~titucie chamber has been supplemented
by tests of the
carburetors aIone in the carburetor test plant.
The program proyides for the continuation of research in all of these problems, ancl in
addition to study the question of the most ad-rmtageol~s form of poppet -nd-res and ports as
viewed from the standpoints of charging efficiency and minimum interference -with mixture
conditions.
The program also protides for a stud-y of carburetion and manifolding for the purpose of
securing fundamental
data on the metertig characteristics of aircraft carburetors with special
This will require also a study of the
reference to their performance at lo-w-air densities.
physical constants of aircraft fuels, such as vapor pressure, vapor volume, viscosities, etc.,
md of pulsating flow of manifolds.
This -work is to be carried ofi by—
(a) Study of wwious types of carbwetors and the carbtlretor metertig devices in the carburetor test plant.
5%%9—21-3
.

32

.&NNUAL REPORT NTA~lONiiL.4DVISORYCOX&lITTEE FOR -&ERONAUTICS.
(b) Subsequent checks on their performance when mounted on engines in the a~iitude
laboratory.
(c) Study of physical constants of fuels by means of physicaI-chemical laboratory ecplipment? which has been developed for the purpose.
(d) Further mathem~tical analysis of the problgrg of melting at clifferent fiir densities.
(e) Laf!:tory
experiments to cletermine the eti-e.cts of pulsating air flow on metering of
IGNITIONSYSTEMS.

The -work performed in this fwlcl has consisted l~rgely of the more or less routine testing
The matliematical theory of the
of new forms of spark pl~lgs and spark-plug insulators.
electrical sicle of the ignition system has been ~vorked out in detxil and checked by Iaborfitory
experiments.
The use of a series gap in the ignition_ secondary has receivecl some additional
attention and apparatus has been assembled for the continuation. of research. in this fieId.
The program for the future provides for the study of the effect of spmrk quality and
intensity on the engine perfornlance~ the eflect of the electrode temperature upon the breakJmvn ~oltage of the spark pIug gap, as -well as a continuation of the research into the auxiliary
spark gap. The program aIso provides for the study of problems of ignition to secure information on the relative performance of different t~pe~ of ignition systems, inc]ucling spark p]ugst
magnetos, battery systems, etc ., and the resexrch will include:
(a) I.kboratory and engine tests of spin-k plugs.
(t) Study of the effect of spark quality and intemity on engine performance.
( c ) Study of the breakdo~~ll volLLrneof sparll gaps in normal operation.
(d) Further verification of the mathematical theory of the magneto.
Much of this work can be conveniently performed in connection with the research on the
pro~>agation of flame.
FUE~ AND COMBUSTION.
D]lring the past year experiments have been made with a number of compounded fuels:
intended to reduce the tendency to knocking characteristics of the ordinary a~iatio~ gasoline.
The results have demonstrated that there are a number of such compouncl fuels which will
permit of a very considerable elevation of the compression ratio and cornpre.ssion temperature
without difficulty.
The effect of the admixture with gasoline or benzol, alcohol, or other substances, hydrocarbon or not, is now rmsonably wdl known. It is possible to specify the proportions of a compound fuel to withstand any reasonable compression rztio, withoutde-relopThe future program provides only for the testing of
ing disagreeable knocking conditions.
sLlch fuel blends as may be introduced from time to time, it being considered thfit the fuel
i]~jection type of engine will ultimately eliminate the necessity for such compounded fuels as
are no-w necessarily used in the very high compression carburetecl engine.
.
The measurement of_ the rate of flame propzga~ion in aircraft engine cylinders has been
continued during the past year, through the medium of a specially equipped single cylinder
Liberty engine. While the resuIts of the investigation indicate a veIocity of flame propagation
in the orclel’ of 20 to M feet per second for ordinary operating conditions it-is felt that the dnta
secured is not yet sufficient to justify the issmmce of a general report upon the subject. To a
large extent, this work is tied up with the investigation
of the problem of cletcmation of
charge, and the general problem of the chemical relations due to combustion.
It is felt that
investigation of all three general phases should be conducted sirnultaneouslyj in order that the
resulting information may be of a fundamental inste~d of a particular nature. The progmm
provides for the continuation of this work during the coming year> as it-is believed that these
are subjects of which too Iittle is now known, in view of their ~ital bearing upon the c~esired
continuous increase of brake mean effective pressure ancl thermal efficiency.
This work is being continued at the Blweau of Standards, and in conducting the tests it
is hoped that clatti bearing on the following items of special importance will be obtained:
(a) The relation between rate of combustion anti pressure distribution in engine cylinders.

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADYISORY COXMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

33

(6) The -velocities of propagation of fkime in engine cylinders and in explosive mixtures
as measured b.y laboratory methods, -with special reference to the relative -mJocities
for different fuels and different mixture ratios.
(c) Measurements of the apparent iiame temperatures in engine cylinders under -iarious
conditions
of operation by direct observation
and spectrum analysis,
(cZ) The ignition temperatures
for mixtures of fuel anfi air under various
(e)

&al@s

of the intermecl;ate

val~e

at different

proclucts

points

of combustion

in the combustion

secured

—
.

if possible.
conditions.

by means

of a sam-pling

cycle.

LUJ3RICAXT8.AliD
LUBRICATION.

During the past year a series of tests were run for the military anthoritie,s to determine the
rehdive merits of oils retied from difterent t.~>es of crude, g-h-ing results of a comparati~e
nature only. Very little work has been done upon the fmndament~ls of cylinder lubrication so
that the real reason for the slight superiority of cme oii o~-er another has not as -yet been
determined.
The future program pro-rides for the cornprehensi-re in-restigation of lubrication phenomena and the properties of oils suitable for aircraft engine lubrication, especially
important because existing speci-tlcations do not guarantee an oil that -will always answer the
requirements.
INDICATORS.
GYIXXDER
PRESSURE
A very satisfactory
step-by-step
diaphragm type indicator has been perfected during
the past year and a number of instruments built and usecl iu the regular work of the LaboThe characteristics of preignition
or knocking, m -well as the normal operating
ratory.
cycles. have been studied -with these instruments and pressures ha-i-e been recorcled of nemIy
hw also been de~-eloped in an automatic
I,W(I pounds per square inch. This instrument
form, in which th~ balancing of the pressures on the two sicles of the diaphragm is automatically protiJecl for. This modification permits of more rapid operation and is probably
the type -which will be settled on for further de-relopment in the laboratory.
Two other
types of indicators are in the preliminary stage ancl -will be further in~estigatecl
The program pro-rides for the continuous perfection of such instruments in order that the stucly of
&e pressure changes in the cylinder may be carried ollt with the greatest degree of accuracy.
It is intended that such studies shall form a part of all important in-restigations involving
the operation of aircraft ergi.nes.
MISCELLAIIEOUS PROBLE51S.

Owing to the pressure of more important work, practically nothing has been done during
the past year with reference to the de-relopment of mufllers for aeronautic engines, except as
is nece.sssrily in-rol~ed in the general problem of the conden~qtion of -i-rater from the exhaust.
gas. Considerable experimental -work has been done on the latter problem and the general
Apparatus has been ciesignecl for the continrequirements ha-w been roughIy determined.
uation of these experiments under free flight conditions upon the power plants of dirigibles.
The program pro-rides that this work shall be continued and also for the further de~elopment of rnufliers for those installations -which do not involve water condensation.
EXTENSIO>- OF
~urin~
~ta~dards,
its work.

the past

the new

engine

laboratory

lms been

completed

at the Bureau

of

thus making
aTa&ble
to the committee
extensi~e
facilities
for the concluct of
.% total of six dynamometers
are at present protided,
and these are so arran~eci

in connection
tested therein.
tion as a whole
During
mometer

year

LABORATORYFACILITIES.

-with the altitude
c?mrnbers tlmt engines-as
large as S00 horsepower
may be
A complete complement
of auxitiary
equipment
is Mclucled, and the installais extremely

laborator~

able funds

convenient.

the year some progress
equipment

has, howe~erj

vi-as macle in the installation

at &

so limited

Lan~le~

l?ield

laboratory.

the size of the staff that

of the committee%
The

small

the work

of

own dyna-

amount
installation

of a-i-ailis not

.—

—

34

ANNUAL REPORT NA~ION& ADVISORY COIK.311TTEE OR .&EK.O~TAUT1(lS.
F

yet compIete. For the same reason it has not been possible to carry out much acbual research
.
WOrli in this Laboratory, the work so far accomplished being largeIy in the nature Of ??reIimirmy investigations to serve as a basis for the research being conducted on the two types
H-is expected thzt the funds available for this laboratory during the
of supercharger.
forthcoming year vviII permit the very considerable extension of the staff and the mxduct
of work on a scale commensurate with the amount of apparatus available.
‘The equipment
consists mainly of five dynamometers ranging from 2 to 450 horsepower capacity, together
The equipment is temporarily housed in ~
with a certain amount of auxiliary apparatus.
stanclard Army steel hangar, a building not zt all suited for the purpose, and it is hoped that
in the near future it -wiI1 be possible to replace this with a permanent building of more substantial construction.
The engine laboratory facilities of the Unitecl States Army Air Serviw station at McCook
Field have been increased so that that orgmization
is well providecl with means for the conduct of the experimental development of power plal~ts.
The Navy Department
maintains a smalI dynamometer
Iaboratiry in the navy” yard
at Washington the equipment-of which has been augmented by making availabIe two eIectric
This laboratory has been largely engaged on. the problem of
dynzmorneters coupled together.
water recovery from the exhaust.
REPORT OF COfi1311TTEE ON 31ATER1-41X FOR AIRCRAFT.
Following
for aircraft:

is a statement

of the organization

and functions

of the committee

on materials

OR~AKIZ~~ON.
Prof. Charles F. Marvin, chairman.
Dr, G. K, Burgess, Bureau of Stanckds,
vice chairman.
Capt. H. TV. FIickinger, United States Army.
Dr. Henry .4. Gardner, Institute of Industrial Research.
PrFfl ‘George B. Haven, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Commander if. C. Hunsaker, United .States Navy.
Dr. ~ay Jeffries, Aluminum
Co. ofherica.
Prof. William WaIker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Prof. E. P. Warnert Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Prof. H. L. Whitternore, Bureau of Standards, acting secretary.
F~N~~ONS.

1. TO aid in determining the problems reIating to materials for aircraft to be expekimentaIIy attacked by governmental and private agencies.
2. To endeavor to coordinate, by counsel and suggestion, the research and experimental
work invoIved in the investigation of such problems.
3. To act as a medium for the interchange of information
regarding investigations
of
materials for aircraft: in progress or proposed.
4, The committee may direct and conduct research and experiment
on materials for
aircraft in such laboratory or laboratories> either in w-hole or in part> as may be pIaced under
its direction.
5. The committee shaIl meet from time to time on caIl of the chairman and report its
actions and recommendations
to the executive committee.
The committee on materiak for aircraft, through its personnel acting as a medium for
the interchange of information regarding investigations
on materials for aircraft, is enabled
to keep in close touch with research in this field of aircraft development.
Much of the research, especially in the development of light alloys, must necessarily be
conducted by the industriw interested in the particular development, and both the Aluminum

.

co. of 5merica
ancl the heriean
Magnesium
Corporation
are represented
on the comnittee.
In order to cover effect,i~ely the large and varied field of research on materials
for aircrafi
three subcommittees
~ubeommmi

-were formed,
ttee on metals

as follows:
(Dr.

G. K. Burgessl

chairman).

H. L. Whitternore, chairman).
on woods and glues (%of.
Subcommittee
on cov&ings, ropes, and protecti~e coat~gs
(Dr. He~Y ~. ‘arder!
chairman).
Most of the research in connection -with the development of materials for aircraft is
financed directly by the Bureau of Construction and Itepair of the hTavy Department
and
the Engineering Division of the Army Air Service.
The Bureau of Construction ancl Repair not only conducts research at its aerodynamical
laboratory at the Washington
Navy Yard and at the nava~ aircraft factory in PhilzdeIphia,
but aIso apportions and finances research probIems to the Bureau of Standards, the Langley
31emorial Aeronautical
Laboratory,
the Institute
of Industrial
12esearch, and the Forest
Products Laboratory.
%bccmmnittee

SUECOMMITTEE OX ?dETALS.

in a report of the progress that has been made in regard to the manufacture and utility
of light alloys it is -well to state-that much of this progress is the resuIt of investigations
either started during the war and completed since the armistice or of work that has been
a naturaI consequence of experience gained during the war. Of those light aluminum alloys
which can be workedl duraIumin or material of sirdar composition, because of its inherent
possibilities, is probably the most widely used and naturally has received the most attention
Dr. 31erica and h~ associates at the Bureau of Standarcls
at the hanLs of the in-instigators.
ha-re ~reatly
as reported
advisable

increased

to preheat

nameIy~ to preheat
found

the lmomledge

in Bureau

to lie between

of
the

to 5~0

Standards
ingots

of

the ~anufact~me

Seient~c

previous

to

paper

and heat

&70. 347.

This

~rentrnen~ of
paper

~~a~u~i%

shows

that

it is

rolling

somewhat
higher than -was cwstomary~
Tbe best quenching
temperature
was
cl. and then roll to ~~~” ~.

510° and 515° C., and quenehin~

should

be in hot water.

The mecha~ical

but
for most purposes it Was folmd b=t to age at 100° C. for about fi~e to six days. A theory of
the meehankm of the hardening of duraIumin was derelopecl, -which has been further amplified
by Dr. ~ay Jeffries.
DuraIumin maybe drop-forged as well as roiled; and some interesting tests on drop-forged
connecting rods are gi-ren by RolIason: who found that the aluminum alloy rods withstood
impact fatigue better than orclinary steel forgings.
Gibson has ako investigated the fatigue resistance of -iwrious durakmins
and concIudes
that, weight for -weight, forged and heat-treated duralumin is equal to, if not superior to,
He also states that under certain limitations
forged steel in its fati=gue-resisting properties.
as to stresses involved that it is comparable -with steel on a -rolume-for-vohme
basis.
As an exampIe of the increasing use of duralumin there. might be cited t-he all-metal
airpIanes, such as the Larsen or others similar to the G~man J~er
mode~.
Th=e ~irplane=s
use durahzmin for wing surface coverings in place of fabric as welI as for structural members.
For the Iatter purpose seandess tubing is essential, although to date satisfactory sources of
supply have not become avaiIabIe in the United States.
Many of the Light casting alloys have been studied by Merica and Karr, as reported in
Bureau of Standards TechnoIogic Paper N’o. 139, ancl the-y determined the tensiIe properties,
hardness, resist ante to corrosion, and resistance to the action of albynating
st.ressss of a
The eflect of various additional elements, such as copper, zinc,
n’umber of compositions.
manganese, maagyesiuro, and nicke~ were studied, and these in-restigators showed that certi-iin
of the casting alloys -were aIso subject to beneficial results from heat treatment.
This practice
-was commended to the manufacturers of castings for realization of its commercial possibilities.
properties

of the ti~hed

material

are quite

dependent

upon

the artificial

a=tig

process,

. .

Jeffries and Gibson also in-restigcctecl the effect of heat trefitment upon cast aluminum
alloys and suggestwl that more uniform results COUIC1e obtained by heating the castings
b
in a bath of fused niter followed by quenching in oil: thm reducing to a minimum the tendency
for the atmosphere to permeate and oxidize the interior of porous castings.
R. J. Anderson has 12uMished several articles on aluminum castings and foundry practice,
particularly with 2 view to producing sound castirigs, free from blowholes ancl harcl spots.
The metallography
of aluminum ancl its alloys has also received some attention; Ylerica,
WaItenberg, and Freeman ~tucliecl aluminum and its aIloys with copper ancl -with magnesium.
The ~arious constituents mere ic]entified anc~ t]le temperature soIubility curves of C’UM, ancl
of Mg4.AI~ determined.
Anderson stucliecl ihe metallography
of commercial aluminum ancl
aluminum in ingot form and comptrecl the microstructure. microstructure,
and frtcture of
tough and brittIe ingots.
For a comprehensive in~estigation of the constitution and positiye identification of the
constituents in aluminum it is necessary- to start with pure aIuminum.
The best aluminum
nom obtainable is seIdom better than 99.S per cent pure. Efforts to procluce tiluminum of
greater purity hzve not 13een successful
thus far.
The corrosion
of the rolled li,ght alloys was

Waltenberg,
and
investigated
by Jferica,
Finn: using three ternary series, .i]–31g–cLI, AL–Mg-Mn, ancl M-Mg-STi. The alloys of the
.$ I–Mg-Mn series resisted corrosion in general better than the others. Hard-rolIed commercial
aluminum corrocles much more than hny of the alloys, annealed aluminum was more resistant.
to corrosion than the hard-rolled filuminurn. but did not compare fayorably with the aI1oys.
Bureau of Stanclards Technologic Pzper No. 132 also gives the mechanical properties of the
various alloys in the coId-rolled, annwdecl, and heat-tre>~ted concljtions.
The Bureau of Standards, in cooperation with the hYayv Department: also conducted tests
on the corrosion of aluminum and its alloys by sea waterj both unprotected ancl with various
protective coatings.
Presence of oil On the ~i-ater where the plates were exposecl lends some
duralurnin
has practicably
the
doubt to the results, but the indications mere that unprotected
same resistance

to corrosion

as that which

as above.
~~rnon~ the new li,ght alloys
ing,
of

This
1.Z9.

alloy

ha~e

Yielcl point. 12.000
reduction
of area.

a tensile

strcn,~th

of

from

Other

findings

22,000

znd to ha~e

to 25,000

pounds

to 14,000 pouncls per square inch; elong~tion~
3.5 per
3.,5 per cent: and Bri.nell ll:wclness of 55 to 75. The

to heat treatment,

such procedure

increfisin~

-were practcially

OLtt,‘( Do-iv me.t:tl”

hayp been brought

is saicl to ccmtairr o~-er 90 per cent ruagnesiun~

~astin~s

subjecf

which

has been protectecl.

the tensile

strength

is quite interesta specific
per

gravi~y

square

jnch;

cent in 2 inchek;
sancl castings
are

to 30,000 pounds

Per

square inch and elongation
ancl reduction
of ~rea to 6 per cent each.
The alloy mcty also be
worl<ecl. clrop forgings haYing a tensile stren@h
of 50,000 pouncls per square inch anc’i 13rine11
hardness
which

of 70,

heretofore

afiity

of

aluminum

No datti are give,n in the literature
has been n great

connection,

in an article

about. 80 per cent magnesium
must

as to the methocl

magnesium

rich

of cnsting

nlIoYs, clue to the

for ox~gen,
nitrogen,
etc. ; Walten12erg ancl Co?ientz in preparing
castin~ in orcler to produce sound material,
a~loys resortecl to TLICLILIM

magnesium

magnesium

In this

on this alloy

clrtiwbacl~ in proclncin~

@

Thomas

and the balance

on tle

aI~lminum

castin:

of elelctronmetal]

and zinc:

it is stated

containing

that great

care

be exercised

in select in,g the sancl for molclinx ancl that the molcls must l)e thoroughly
The alloy is meltecl in -ivrou~ht-iron
or cast-steel crucibles, as
dried to–~et rid of all moisture.
T%3 cruci?.)Ies are coterecl with an
mzgme,siunl Tri]l take Llp the silica of grap]lite
crucibles,

iron cover to reduce

oxidztion.

the pouring

temperature

must be closely

controlled

melting point) and the melt poured directIy after renching the proper temperature.
is brittle down to 100° ~. ancl the casting must not be clistnrbed until COICI. He

(just

al-x-we

The alloy
gives

illus-

in this m,anner.
The na~al aircraft factory conducted a test of the comparison of the effect-of punched and
drilled rivet holes on the physical properties of chmaIumin sheet, and to determine -whether

trations

of ~ery souncl castings

producecl

ANNUAL BEPOET NATIONAL ADYISORY COM2LITTEE FOB AERONAUTICS.

37

punching is harmful to the material.
The general conclusion of this investigation
is that
rivet hoks made by punching -will not weaken duralumin sheets more than those made by
drilling, and comparati~e tests made on duralurnin sheets in the four states in -which it is
likely to be handled showed the punched specimens to be slightly stronger than the drillecl
specimens.
The Bureau of Construction and llepiiir of the N’avy has also aut.horizecl an investigation
of the strenedh and fati=gwe -ralue of cluralurnin as atfected by hemt treatment and -worhting.
This in-restigation will be conducted at the Bureau of Stanclarcls along Iines thati have been
proposed by the committee on materials for aircraft.
A special report is being prepared by A- M. Hunt, director of research of the American
Ma~gmesium Corporation, Niagara Falls, X. ~ ., on the present status of magnesium alloys,
with special reference to their possible use in connection -with aircraft.
The Engineering Division of the Air Service of the Army is making extensi~e preparations
to carry on experiments in connection with the dev-eIopment of aluminum and magnesium
alloys for use in the construction of aircraft.

—

SUBC035WITEE ON WOODS AXD GLUES.

of -woods and glues to be used
IIost of the researeh in connection vvith the development
in co~~truction of aircraft is carried on at the forest-products
laboratory at Xaclison, T&.
The forest-proclucts laboratory is developing for the Bnrean of Construction and Repair a
17-foot strut for a Navy flying boat, and is also engaged in the cle-relopment of a streamline
strut and the determination of the dimensions of wicle struts of uniform stren=d. h. Tests ha-re
Impro-rement has been made in the fcwmuIa for a
also been made upon airship girders.
waterproof glue developed by the forest-products
laboratory for use in gluing wood. Increasing or decreasing greatly the proportion of sodium silicate shortens the life of the gluel
aIthough this has little effect on the strmgth or water resistance.
The life of the glue is Iess
Water resistance increases -with the increase of the
the greater the amount of lime content.
zrnount of lime; ~er-y rapiclly at first, but later more slowly.
With -iery high lime content
the -water resistance falls off slight] y.
Weathering tfits were also conc~ucted on all--reneer wing sections. The all-~eneer w-kg
used was built and previously tested by mnd loading, ancl -was cut into fi~e sections and co~ered
The usefulness of both -reneers appeared to
with -rarnish and aluminum leaf for protection.
be equal, but the surface of the one protected by aluminum Iezf TWLSin better condition than
the one protected by spar varnish.
Strength tests vvere also conducted on screw fastenings of pIywood, -with the result that it
was found that round-head screws with washers gke abOLLt the s?ame strength at flat-headecl
scre-ws of the same
sizes, margin,
The

size vvithout

and spacing

Bureau

of UoDstruction

of plywood.

The object

species,

of varying

low

effect

density

strength,
plywoocl,

species

applied

increase

ratio

in core

and Repair
of ticknes-s

to high

tests
species

remltecl

in recommendations

and thicknesses

also authorized

to the

density

of core to total
species

the in~estiga~io~

screw

of the strength

data on properti=

paneI thickness,

on faces.

for

of pl~wood.

~tiffness

of different

and the effect
in bencIing,

—

of

tensi~e

ancl toughness increase -with the increase of the density of the
and tensile strength
of 3-pl~ mood are greater
when” force

Strength

-when the force

perpendicular

The

of these tests mass to secure comparati~e

resistance to splitting,
and column benclin~

is appJiecl perpendicular.
of plies

-washers.

for use vi-ith various

.
——

ancl stiflness

is appliecl

in column

parallel

~ending

to the ~ain

decrease

and incresse

.——

as the number
when

force

is

grain.
.

SUBCOMMITTEE OX COVERIXGS, DoPES, AIVD PROTECTIVE COATINGS.

The Bureau of Construction ancl Repair is de-t-eloping a substitute for .goldbeater’s skin.
It is intended to use this material in the construction of gas cells for rigid airships, and possibly
in the construction of envelopes for nonrigicl airships.
The material has properties approach-

—

ANATUALREPORT hTA’JYONAL
ADVISORY C6MMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

’38

ing the properties which made goIdbeater’s skin of value, namely, high resistance to the passage
It is capable of being procluced in sheets of large area, and
of
hydrogen gxs, an_d Iightness.
cemented -with comparative ease.
The 13ureau of Construction and Repair has requested the Bureau of Standards to deveIop
a cement for the attaching of goIdbeater’s skin to cotton cloth. The material should resist the
action of moisture, and at the same time remfiin permanently
flexible and adherent.
M is
intended to replace the rubber cement at present in use. The latter is understood b have a
slow deteriorating effect on goldbeater’s &in. The ~lew cement should have no deteriorating
effect. and if possible actually have z preservati~’e action.
The Bureau of St:mdards is also developing a silbstitute for rubber proofing in balloon
f~brics. It is beIieved that other substances may have the properties of being impermeable to
hydrogen in equal or better degree than rubber, and may also be made flexible and c~pable of
nppIfcation ~n very much the same manner as that used with rubber.
TECHNICAL
During

the past year,

tl~e publication

of

the

28 teclmical

PUBL1CATIONS

committee
reports,

a wide

range. of subjects

nizance

of the wmious subcommittees,

an(? recommended

on which

for pub]ieation

OF THE COMMITTEE.

on publications
a summary

research

of

and

intelligence

which

follows.

has been conducted

each report
to the executive

being approved
committee.

has
The

recommended
reports

under the supervision
by the subcommittee
The technical reports

cover

and coginterested
presented

represent funcltmenttl
research in ~eronan~ics carried on at different aeronautical
laboratories
Laboratory, McCook FieId, the
in this country, including
tile Langley Ylemoria] Aeronautical

Aeronautical Laboratory at the Washington Navy Yard, the Bureau o-f Standards, and the
LeIand Stanford Junior University.
Considerable technical information
is obtainecl by the committee that is of immediate
interest to those interested in experimental and research probIems in connection with aeronautics. To make this information immedi~tely nvailablej the hTational Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics has authorized the committee on pnblieztions ancl intelligence to issue a series
of’( Technical h70tes.” In accordance with this authorization, the committee has issued 16 technical notes, on subjects that were of immediate interestl not only to research laboratories, but
A ~~t of the technical notes isst~ed during tile year fo]]ows
also to airplane manufacturers.
the general summary of the technicaI reports.
The first annuaI report of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics contained technicaI reports NOS. 1 to 7; the second annuaI report, Nos. 8 to 12; the third annual report, NTOS.
13 to 23; the fourth annuaI report, Nos. 24 to 50,; the fifth annuaI report, hTos. 51 to 82; and since
the preparation of the fifth annuaI report, the committee has issued the following technicaI
reports, Nos. 33 to 110:
Rqwif
No. 83, entjtled “ Wind Tunnel Studies in Aerodynamic
Phenomena at High
Speed,” by F. W. Cald-well and E. N. Fales, Engineering
Division, Air Service, McCook
FieId.—A great amount of research and experimental -work has been done and fair success
obtained in an effort to place airplane an-d propeller design upon an empiricaI basis. However, one can not fail to be impresse? by the apparent Iack of data availabIe toward establishing
flow phenomena upon a rational basis, such that the-y may be interpreted in terms of the laws
of physics.
WTith this end in view it -was the object of the authors to design a -wind tunnel difiering
from the usual type especially in regard to Iarge power ~nd speed of flow. This involved
features whose suitability could not be predicted; for, after all zvfiilabIe information has been
secured on frill-size and model wind tunneIs in various-parts of the worId, there remains much
It is the- assumption of Dr. George de Bothezat that
obscurity about the a,ir flow phenomenz.
the type of air flow which establishes itseIf is governed by the stresses set up in the air passing
the aerofoil. The stresses increase as the veIocity rises, and it is easy to conceive that a given
type of flow is possib~e only so long as the shearing stresses developed in the fluid do not exceed
a certain rna=gnitude which depends on the value of the viscosity coefficient.

39

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMXIITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
Experimental
of lack

of

tunnel

investigation

aclequate

to invest.i@e

the course

of

of

methocls.

ihe flow

‘The writers

the scaling

the experiments,

effect

has heretofore
laicl

out the

clue to high

how-ever,

it was

been

~elocities

founcl

as a fog

of fluid dynamics periainin~
visualizing
air flow depencls

-when the ternperatmre

liquicl

nucleus

&-op

is brought

pressure
ra=ed

about

through

to the de-iv point,

become

readily

air flow past an aero?c’oil under

Z?eport No. Q, entitled

In the llc~ook

expansion
The

if too lo-iv, and the necessary

F1OW vortices

.

~ reduced

of -water.

-risible,

of

relative

nuc]eus

for

the

air

h@ctity

of propeller

because

Field
the

tind

During

aerofoils

to visualize

a solution
empirical

providwl

Field
during

air

to one of the
measurement

that there

-wind tunnel
acceleration

of the atmosphere

condensation

and the report

differenb

unsuccessful

the 31c~ook

flow.

fundaof the

to flight and air flow.
The method described in the
upon the fact thd the moisture in the air condenses

to start the condensation.

of 100 inches

of

impossible

The velocities
of the air flow obtain~
by the writers offers
mental problems
of aerocl-jmamics,
namely,
the quantitative
phenomena
report for

rather

desibm

contains

is provided
many

is a solid

or

the temperature

due

t.o a drop

of

can be artidcially
by the model

photographs

tested.

showing

the

conditions.

“ Data on the Design of Ply-wood for Aircraft;’ by Armin Elmendorf, Forest Service.-This
report gi-res the results of inv-estimations made by the Forest
Products Laboratory of the ‘United States Forest Service at Madison, Wk., for the War and
h’avy Departments.
Sut%cient discussion on the mechanical and physicaI properties
of
pIyvood is included so that the data may be intelligently
used. The data, although primarfiy
intended for aircraft design: ha-re a broader field of application.
The report makes available
data which will aid the designer in determining the plywood that is best adapted to various
aircraft parts- The results ex@essed in the report w-ere determined through a comprehensive
test of the mechanical anc~ physical properties of pIymood and Of the -way these properties
vary -with the density, number, -thickness, and arrangement of the plies and the direction of
grain of the plies.
l?epcwt #o. 85, entitled “ Moisture 13esistant Finishes for Airplane Woo@” by M. El
Dmlap, Forest Service.-This
report describes briefl~ a series of experiments made at the
Forest Products Laboratory, llacli~on, l~is.l to deternune the comparati~e moisture resistance
of linseed oil, imprecation treatments, condensation varnishes oil varnishes, enamek, ce_ituIose
varnishes: rubbert electroplated and sprayed metaI coatings: and metal-leaf coatings when
applied to wood.
AN coatings e~cept the rubber and electroplated
rnetd coatings, which were not
developed suficie~tly to make them practical, admitted moisture in varying degrees. The
most effecti~e and at the same time most practical coating -was found to be that of aluminum
leaf.
TE@s -were made by applying coatings to p;nels of yellow birch, care being taken that
the panels were carefully smoothed and the corners rounded.
ln generaI, a coat of filler
was first applied, followed by three coats of the coating material being studied; and in some
cases the material app]ied required special methods of application.
After the panels had
dried thoroughly they were subjected to an atmosphere of the h~ifity
of 95 to 100 Per cent
for 17 days.
Report Ho. ’86, ent.itIed “ Properties of Special Types of Radia@rs,” by S. R. Parsons,
Bureau of Standards.—This
report discusses the general performance characteristics of three
speciaI classes of radiators: Those -with fiat-plate -water tubes, fin and tube types, and types
Cum-es and tables show the performance
of representative
that whistle in an air stream.
Empirical equations
radiators of each cIass and compare the flat-plate ancl whistling types.
are given for estimating the performance of flat-pIate radiators of -rarious dimensions.
The report aIso contains a brief discussion: with curves, sho~ing the effect of yawing on
the properties of a radiator.
It -was found that a careful distinction shoulcl be made between radiators -whose water
t~lbes are smooth and other types using perforated plates or deep ancl nzrrow tubes pIaced

—

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL .M)VISORYCOMMITTEE FOR .AERONAUTICS.

40

in rows one behind

the other.

of the air flow ctiused a great

Holes

in water

increase

although
the heat transfer
per square foot
turbulence
causecl by the use of perforations,
merit.
and,

The
indeeclj

turbulence

same result
no type

of

has been

found

racliator

is lmown

is not aceompmiecl

l?epcwt flTo. 871 entitled

tubes or spaces

in head

resistance

of

cooling

~et-ween them

and m.decrease
surface

The net result

was

vanes

to the -writer in which

by a cleerease in the figure
“ ~ffec&3 of N’ature of coo~ing

increased

was a decrease

in the case of turbulent

in the clirection

in mass flow
by

the

of air,
great.

in the figure

in cellular

an artificial

of

radj ators,
increase

of

of merit.
surface

on Radiator

l’erformance,’}

Bureau of Stanckwds. This report discusses the
effects of roughness, smoothness, and cleanness of cooling surf~ces on the -performance of
aeronautic radiators, as shown by experimental work, -with different conditions of surface,
on (1) heat transfer from a single brass tube ancl from a radiator; (2) prcssurs drop in an
air stream in a single brass tube and in a radiztor;
(3) head resistance of a radiator: and
(4) flow of air through a rctcliator. It is shown that while smooth sllrfac,es are better than
rough, the surfaces usually founcl in commercial radiators do not differ enough to show
marked effect on performance! provided tlte wwfocez a~’e ?cept clean.
An accumulation of oil and dust on the surface will have a very harmful effect on the
performance of the radiator.
The heat transfer from an orclkary smooth surfzce may be
increased l? per cent in ~ good air $30w by gi~ing the surface a high polish, or it mxy be
decreased 10 per cent or more by smoking the surface, ancl the figure of merit of the racliator
then may be somewhat increased by polishing the svrface, 6 to I(J per cent being observed
———
in one case.
In general$ the performance of a. radiator may be improved by polishing the surfaces;
and if they are fairIy smooth and cIean, a high polish is requirecl to produce an appreciable
change in the property of the radiatorj ancl there is a question whether or not such a u~ethod
of improvement, is practicable.
Report No. 88, entitlecl “ Pressure Drop in Radiator Air Tubes,” by S. R. Parsons,
Bureau of Standards.
This report describes a methocl for measuring the drop in static
(1)
a
reason for the discrepancy noted
pressure in air flowing through a radiator and ShOWS
by various observers between heacl resistance ancl drop in pressure;
(2) a difference in
~legree of contraction of the jet in entering a circular cell ancl a square ceH; (3) the ratio
. of internaI frictional resistance to total head resistance for two representative types; ‘(4) the
e lieck of smoothness of surface on pressure gradient; ancl (5) the eflect-s of sup~]lying heat
to the radiator on pressure gradienL
The fact that the pressure gradients are found to be approximat,eIy proportional
to the
square of the rate of flow of air appears to indicate turbulent flow, e~”en in the short tubes
of the radiator.
It was founcl that in general the drop in the static pressure in the air stream through
a cellular radiator and the pressure gradient-i~ the air tubes are practically proportional to
the sauare of the air flow in a given air density; that the difference between the hetid
resistance per unit area and the fall of static pressure through the air tubes in radiators k
apparent rather than real; and that radiators of diflerent types differ widely in the amount
of contraction of the jet at entrance.
The frictional resistance -was found to vary considerably,
and in one case to be two-thirds of the head resistance. in the type using circular cells ancl onehaIf of the head resistance of the radiator type using squnre cells of approximately
the same
dimensions,
Report
I}To, 89. entitled “ Comparison of Mcogas Aviation Fuel with Export Aviation
Gasoline,” by lT. R. Gage, S. TIT.Sparrow, ancl D. R; Harper, of the Bureau of Standards.—
ancl alcohol when Ltsed in interns]-combustion
engines designed for
Mixtures of gasoline
by ~. R. Parsons

m-id R, T. Kleinsehmidt,

gasoIine have been founcl to possess the advantage of alcohol in -withstanding high compression tithout
‘t knock,’} while retaining advantages of gasoIine with reg~rd to starting
Tests of such fuels for maximum power-producing
ability and fuel economy
characteristics.

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE

41

FOR AERONAU’HCS.

at various rates of consumption are thus of practical importance, with espwial reference tO
high-compression
en=gine de~elopment.
“
Aviation alcogas, prepared by the l~clustrial Alcohol Co., of Baltimore, Md., for trial
by the Na~ Department and by the latter submitted to the Bureau of Standards for test,
was a mixture apparently of about 40 per cent, alcohol, 35 per cent gadine,
17 per cent
iJenzoI, and 8 per cent other ingredients.
This is not the alcogas prepared for commercial
or passenger car use. The exact composition and methods of manufacture are a trade secret.
The tests made for the Xa-ry Department consisted in a direcb comparison, in a I-2-cylinder
(export grade) aviation gasoline with
Liberty engine, between alcogas and standard “X”
respect. to maximum power obtainable and fuel consumption with the leanest mixture giving
maximum po-wer. The tests were made in the altitude laboratory at the Burezu of Standards,
where co~trollecl. conditions s“iulate
those of any altitude up to 30,000 feet. The speed
range covered was from 1:400 to l@10 re-rolutions per minute and the altitude rang-e from
ground Ie-re.lto 25,000 feet. Two series of comparisons were made> one with 5.6 compression
ratio pistons and one with 7.2 com~ression ratio pistons
The results of the tests showed the following performance of alcogas in comparison with
X gasoline as a standard:

.

-

.—

(1) At 5.6 compression the same m:a+ium power procluctiou at ground level and a genera~
average of 4 per cent nzore power at ahitude, the maximum difference being about 6 per cent
at 6,400 feet. and 1:800 revolutions per minute.
(!2) At 7.2 compression cm al-emge and fairly uniform increase of 4 per cent in power at
altitude? no comparative figure for X gasoline at grouncl level being determined with this
compression.
(3) A fueI consumption per brake horsepower of from 10 per cent to 15 per cent more by
weight to secure this maximum power at my aititude or speed -with either compression ratio.
(Jwing to 12 per cent higher density of a]cogas, the fU~] consumption in terms of volume per
brake horsepower is practicably the kame as -with X g~soline.
(4) Thermal efficiency superior by about 15 per cent. .+ pound of alcogas contains about
22 per cent less heat units than a pound of gasoline , so that in secmring more power with 15
per cent greater -weight of fuel it is e-i-iclent that the a~aiIable energy of alcogas is moti
fully utilized than that of gasoline.
Rejort ;I”o. 90, entitIecl “ Comparison of Heeter FueI with- Export Aviation Gasoline:’ b~~
H. C. Dickinson, T. R. Gage, ancl S. W. Sparrow, of the Burezu of Standards.—.-iviation
engine de-relopments for attaining Ligher power at altitude are fo~owing t-w-oprincipal linest
~uperchi~rgfig and increase
which

are capable

m}~ich -mill operate
Hecter

fuel,

The

whence

Hecter

below

of operating
a care-ful

from

(C8H8)

l%t~o.

uncler compressions

at compression

fuel suppliecl

3d per cent benzol
and Distilling

in conlpression
ratios

For the latter fuels have been demanded
.&mong the fuels
too high for gasoline.

up to at ~east S.0 without

cleterminzticm

of its ~erf.mnmnce

by the Bureriu

of nines

and ‘TO per cent c@ohmtme

Hrst drop

the a~-era~e clistillaticm

to 90 per cent at nearly
temperature

preignition

or “ pinking”

for use in these tests -was a mixture
(~.l+lz),

ha~-in~ a low

a constant

(“ mean -i-olatility”)

is

is of importance.
freeziu~

temperature,

about

01

point,
!20° C.

of the ~ gasoline.

This comparison of the performance of the two fuels in an atiation en=tie -was made in
the altitude chamber at the Bureau of St;mclarcl-s, clupIicati~g altitude conditions up to about
of the air entering
the carburetor
was maintained
23.(K’)o feet, except that the temperature
at about 10° C. A Liberty 12-cylinder atiation engine was used, supplied
r!early constant
“
with special pistons girirg a compression ration of 7.52 (the compression pressure measured
by check-~alve gauge was 173 pounds per square inch).
Stromberg carburetors -were used and
-were acljussed for each change of fuel: speed, load> ancl altitude so as to gi~e the maximum
The tests co~ered a speed range of 1,400
possible power -with the least fuel for this power.
to I,8W r. p. m.
The results of these experiment
show that the power demloped by Hecter fuel is the
~ame as that de~-eloped by expofi a~ztion gasoline at about l)SOO r. p. m. at alI altitudes.

.
—
*
—
——

ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY C,OMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

42

At lower speeds differences in the power developed by the fuels become evident.
At 1,400
r. p. m. and 25,000 feet Hecter gives a little less- power than X gasoIine, at 15,000 feet about
the same, and at 6,000 feet perhaps 6 per cent more.
Comparisons at ground level were
omitted to avoid any possibility of damaging the engine by operating with open throttle OR
The fuel consumption per unit. power based on weight,
gasoline at so high a compression.
not volume, averaged more than 10 per cent greater ivith Hecter than with X gasoline, considering all conditions.
The thermal efficiency of the engine -when using Hecter is less than
when using gasoline, particularly
at. higher speeds, a generalization
of the difference for
all altitudes and speeds being 8 per cent. The general deduction from these facts is. that more
Hecter is ‘exhausted unburnt. Undoubtedly Hecter can withstand high compression pressures
and temperatures -without preignition.
This characteristic was proved by operating the engine
(compression ratio 7.!2) with full throttle at 1,600 i.- p. m. 6n the ground, carburetor air
temperature 42° C. ‘(107.6” F.) and jacket-water temperature, leaving engine, at 90° C.
(194° F.).
No signs of preignition or “ pinking” were noted.
Report No. 91, “ Nomenclature for Aeronautics,” by the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics.—This
nomenclature and Iist of symbols were approved by the executive committee
of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, for publication as a technicaI report, on
.lpr~] 1, 1920, on recommendation of the subcommittee on aerodynamics.
The purpose of the committee in the preparation and publication of-this report is to secure
u~iformity in the oflicial documents of the C~overnment and, as far as possibIe, in technicnl md
This report “supersedes all previous publications of the comother commercial publications,
mit tee on this subject.
The subcommittee on aerodynamics had charge of the preparation of the report.
It was
materially assisted by the Interclepartmental
Confe,re~ce on Aeronautical NTomencIature and
SymboIs, organized by the executi~-e committee, -with the fipproval of the XITar and Navy Depm-tments, for the purpose of giving aclequate representation to the divisions of the Arm-y
Air Service and to the bureaus of the Navy Department- most concerned.
The first meeting
of the interdepartmental conference was held on October 23, 1919, and the second meeting on
January M, 1920, at–which meeting this report was unanimously approred and recommended
tc the subcommittee on aerodynamics, with the reservation that stabiIity terms and power-plant
terms be given further and special consideration.
The stability terms were-accordingly
referrecl for special consideration to Messrs. E. B.
Wilson, ,J. C’. Hunsaker, A. F. Zahm. E. P. Warner, and H. Bateman, and the power-plant terms
were referred to. the subcommittee on power plants for aircraft:
The complete report was
adopted by the subcommittee on aerodj-nzmics on March 8, 1920, and recommended to-the
executive committee for approval and publication.
Repo~t iVo. ,9%,entitled “Analysis of Wing Truss Stresses/~ by E. P. Winner and lloy G.
MiIIer, Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory.
AirpIane wing trusses are generally designed to contain redundant members (stagger -wires and external drag wires) which! according to common practice, are not taken into zccount in calculations, so as to simplify the stress
analysis by rendering the structure staiiczlly determinate.
A more accurate method, in which
the redundancies are included, involves a solution by means of CastigIiano’s. method of least
work.
For the purpose of demonstrating the practical application of the methocl of least -work
the stresses for several cases of Ioading were worked out. for a structure similar to that of the
Curtiss JN-4H.
Case I -was taken as the condition of velocity of 100 miIes per hour combined with the
angIe of attack of maximum Iift.
Case Ia assumed the same loading but neglected the distortion of wooden members in the least-work analysis.
So little error was involved in Case Ia
(nowhere

exceeding

employed

for each succeeding

5 per

cent

case

11 tissumed a diving

of

the uItimate

strength)

that’ this

simplified

method

case.
speed of-120

miles per hour and an angle of attack

of no lift,

was

.

AA’NUAL REPORT NATIOA’AL ADVLSORY COMMITTEE

Case III

~a~ worked

out for the conditions

imposed

FOR AERONAUTICS.

by the sand load recommended

43

in

N. A. C. A. Technical Note No. 6.
An analysis for each case -was also carried through with the stresses corrected for the worst
initial tensions -which tensiometer reaclings on ser-rice machines indicated were probable.
It was conchded that(i) Th~::dKIKdg of a least-work analysis of a new clesign for at least one case is thoroughly
(ii)

The wooden members may be omitted from consideration. in the work equations
without causing any serious error.
when the load is approximately
equally
(iii) Tne effect of the stztgger -wires is unimportant
distributed between the front and rear trusses. The stagger wires are subjected to
their worst stresses while diving.
(i-r) Only very rarely are both external drag wires stressed simultaneously.
(v) The initial tenssons are almost always exce=+ive, patiic~arly
in the stagger wires.
The following recommendations were made:
I. Omy one external drag tie
sho~d be used on each side of the plane of symmetry and
none are required if the front flying wires =e strengthened and their attachment
to the fuselage carried forward.
H. The long stagger wire is generally the more severely stressed. If a steel tube is used
for stagger bracing it should form the short diagonal of the panel.
III. Airplanes should be rigged, -whenever possible, by means of a tensiometer and in
accordance with a scheduIe of initial te~~ions to be provided hy the desibner.
Report No. 93, entitled “ Properties of Aerofoil Sections~’ by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.—The
object of this report is to bring together the investigations of
the various aerodynamic laboratories of this country and Europe upon the subject of aerofoils
The data have been so arranged as
suitable for use as lift@
or control surfaces on aircraft.
to be of most use to designing e@neers
and for purposes of general reference.
It is the
purpose of the committee to publish all existing tests on aerofoil sections, and present this
information in a new form.
The absolute system of coefficients has been used, since it is thought by the National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics that this sy~em is the one most suited for international
me, and yet is one for which a desired transformation
can be easily made. For this puropse
~ set of transformation constants is included in this report.
Each aerofoiI section is given a reference number, and the test data are presented in the
form of curves from which the coeflkients can be read with su5cient accuracy for design purposes. ‘l’he dimensions of the profile of each section are given at _rarious stations along the
chord in per cent of the chord using as datum the line shown on the curves.
‘The shape of the
section is also shown in reasonable accuracy to enable one to more clearly visualize the section
The more accurately to obtain th~
under consideration
together with its characteristics.
dimensions of the profile of each section, a separate data sheet for each section has been included,
which gives an additional decimal place for the greater portion of the ordinates.
The authority for the results here presented is given as the name of the laboratory at
which the experiments were conducted with the size of model, wind ~elocity, and date of test.
‘lhree separate indices are given—a chart index which makes it possible for a desi=gqer to
select the -wing section most suitable for the particular desi=~ he is interested in; a group index
which is arranged in the same order as the curve sheets; that is, by countries and laboratories
at which tests were conducted, each section also being designated by a reference number; and
an alphabetical index.
Yu order that the desigDer may easily pick out a w@m section which is suited to the type of
machine on which he is working, four index charts are given which classify the wings according
to their aerodynamic and structural properties.

—

44

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CO.3LM.ITT!EE .ARRONAUTICS.
FOR

Repo~t No. 94, entitled “ The Efficiency of Small Bearing~ in Instruments of the Type
Laboratory .-This
i-~secl in Aircraft.”
by F. H. Norton, Langley Memorial Aeronautical
report cIeals with the construction and properties of ?wwings and pivots for use in instruments.
The static and running friction for both thrust and rldial loads was determined for a ~Umber
The static rocking friction was also measured
of coriical pimts ancl cylindrical and ball bearings.
for several conical and ball bearings uncler a heavy load, especially to determine their suitIn constructing conical pivots and
xbi~ity for use in an h’. P. L. type wincl tunnel balance.
sockets it was found that the piyots should be harclened ancl highly polished, preferably with
a revolving lap: ancl that the sockets should be made by punching with a hardened and polishecl
punch.
It was found that-for a light load the conical pi~-ots gim less friction than any other
When the loacl exceeds about
typel and their w-earing qualities when hardened are excellent,
l:(?OOgrams ball bea~lngs gi~e less friction than pivots and -will stand shocks and wear better.
Verv small ball bearings are unsatisfactory
because the proportional
accuracy of the balk
“
and races is not high enough to insure smooth rurmbng. Ior rocking pi~ots under heavy
loads it was founcl that a ball-ancl-socket bearing: consisting of z hemispherical socket and
w sphere of smaller diameter concentric with it with a row of smxll balls resting betvwan the
two, -was superior tcra pivot resting in a socket. It was found that vibration such as o-ccurs
in an airplane will greatIy recluce the st~tic friction of a pivot or bearing, in some cases to as
little

as one-t.wentietli
of its stltic value.
~epo~t i]ro. 96, entitled ‘i Diagrams
of

Airplme

Stability,”

by H. Bateman,

California

Institute of Technology.—In
this report a study is m~cle of the effect. orL lorigituclinal and lateral oscillations of an airplane of simmdtaneous varifions
in two resistance derivatives -while
The results are represented by diagrams in
the remainder of the clerivatires are constant.
which the two variable resistance cleri~-atiwxs are used as coordinates, ancl curves are plotted
along which the moth-dus of deczy of a long oscillation has a constant value. The same type of
For longituclina] stability it
analysis is also cxrried owt for the stability of the parachute.
is concluded that a decrease in FO unfavorable to stzbility, but it may be offset by a variation
is
effect of a spring flap is discussed that will change c from its
It is found that a positive I-alue
a positiye or negative quantity.
lt is also founcl that an increase in the value of ~ is unfavorof L is unfavorable
to satiability.
able to stability~ ancl thatl if & is made positi~-e, the tim of clamping is clecreaseci
In lateral
in the,other
usu~l value

derivatives.

The

of O to either

sttibility it is found that the greater the value of & the gre:~tcr is the effect on the clamping of
a change in w, and that an increase in w decreases the time of dampingt but does not greatly
When f=O an increase in I decreases the time of clamping and inc!eases
alter the period.
the periocl~ but when & is positive the eflect seems to be re~-ersed. An increase in a Wiclens
the gap between the curves t=a constant, ancl to gr~atly increase the period when ~=1 and

in
&=2. ‘~l~e cl~ief effect Of a decrease in w seems to be a sk@ ~~~~~nge curvature of the cum-e
ln discussing- the stability
of a helicopter
it is concluded
that the gyroscopic
f=a constant.
eil’ect on stability will be greater than in the case of the airplane.
Report A70. 96, entitled “ St~ticzd Lcmgitl~clinal Stability of Airplanes,” by E. P. Warner,
Memorial Aeronautical Ltiboratory.-This
report, mhicll is a continuation of the “ Preklgley
liminary Report on Free Flight Testing”
(No. 70), p~esents a detailed theoretic:d amalysis of
statical stability with free and locked controls ancl also the results of many free flight tests on
se\eral types of airplanes.
In developing the theory, of stability with loc~e~ controls “an expression for pitching
moment is clerived in simple terms by considering the total momeut as the sum of the moments
ctne to wings and tail surfi~ce. This expression, when differentiated with respect to angle of
incidence enables an analysis to be macie of the factors contributing to the pitching moment.
The effects of slip stream and down w-ash are also ~.onsidered ancl it is conchlc~ed that the
Q. G, locatio]l has but slight effect or stability> and that stability is much improved by ill_creLlsing the efficiency of the tail surfaces, which may be clone by using an ‘{ inverted” tail plane.
The results of free flight tests with locl<ecl controls are discussed fit length and it is shown
that the agreement between the experiment al results arid theory is very satisfactory,

&YNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COM311TTEE FOR AERONILUTZOS.

45

The theory of stabiIit-y with free mntroLs is nok amemdie to the simple mathematical treatment used in the case of locked ecntrols~ but a clear statement of the conditions enzbles several
{v]n[:ll~iom to be drawn, one of which is that the fixed tail surfaces shodd be much larger than
the movable surfaces.
The discussion of flight tests -with free controls co~ers the effect of C. G. position, tail
setting, and slip stream on the JhT-4H and gives an analysis of the curves of forces on control
stick for the VIiW~ ‘U. S. A. C-II, a~d M_artiu transport.
RepoTt A’C). 97, “ General Theory of the Steady Motion of an Airplane,”
by George de
B,,tIIezzt,
Eugineerbg
~i~ision, .&_r Sem-ice of the Army.-The
-writer points out briefly the
of the method proposecl fur the study of Lhe steady motion of an airplane, which is
,;~~erent from other me~ods now used. M. Paul Pairdev6 has shown how convenient the clragHis treatment of this subject can be
lift cur-re -was for the study of airplane steady motion.
No. 1, January 1, 1910. In the author’s book “ Etude
found in “La Technique Aeronautique,”

histo~~

de la StabiIit6 l’.!eroplane~’: Paris, 1911, hi? has addecl to the drag-lift curre the curve called
the” speed curve” which permits a direct checking- of the speed of the airplane under all flying
conditions.
But the speed cur-re was plotted in the same quadrant as the drag-lift cur-i-e. Later}
with the prob~essi~e development of aeronautical sciencel mcl with the continually increasing
knowledge concerning engines and propellers, the author was brought to ackl the three other
quadrants to the original quaclrant, and thus u-as obtained the steady motion chart -which is
described in detail in this report.
‘1’l~i+chart therefore permits one to red clirectly for a gi~-en airplane its horizontal speed
at any altitude? its rate of climb at any altituclef its xpparerk inclination to the horizon at any
moment: its ceiling, its -propeller thrust, re-rolutions, efficiency, and power absorbed, that is! the
compIete set of quantities in~olved in the subject, and to follow the ~-ariations of cdl these
quantities both for -varialde altitude and for -rariable throttleThe chart also permits one to
follow the variation of W of the tibo~e quantities in flight as a function of the lift coefficient and
of the speed.
‘lhe author also discusses in this report the interaction of the airplane and propeller
through the slipstream and the question of the properties of the engine-propeller
system and its
dependence upon the properties of the engine considered alone ancl of the propelIer considered
alone wiIl be found treated here in the general manner demanded by actual aeronautical
There is also a discussion of the question of a standard atmosphere.
engineering practice.
In Part IV the general theory of the steady motio~ of an airplane is de-reloped, and after
the ba.sie equations have been established and the methods to be used described a general
survey of the properties of airplane steady motion is gi-i-en. A detailed discussion of climbing phenomena will be found and the general fo~mulas established for the rate of climb and
time of climb. which quantities under the simplest assumptions appear as hyperbolic functions of the ceiling. It is also sho-wn as a consequence under mhat. conditions
cme can drive
the law of linear -rariation of the r%te of climb -with altitude as obser~ed practically.
Repot’t i~o. 98, entitled “ Design of Ttlncl Tunnels ancl Wind Tunnel Propellers>” by E. P.
N’arner and F. H. Norton, Langley Memorial Aeronautical
Laboratory.—This
report is a
continuation of h’atiomd Adyisory Committee for Aeronautics> Report h’o. 73. The variations
in -relocity and direction of the wincl stream were studied by means of a recording air speed
The -work was carried on both in a l-foot diameter model
meter ancl a recording yawmeter.
tunnel and in a b-foot full-sized tunnel. and wherever possible comparison -n-as made between
them. It was found that placing raclial vanes directly before the propelIer in the exit cone
increased the efficiency of the tunnel t-o a considerable extent and also ga-re a steaclier flow.
The plming of a hone~-comb at the mouth of the experimental portion was of the gremtest
aid in straightening the air flow, but at the same time this decreased the etllciency of the
tunnel. .Se~eral types of diffnssr -were triecl in the return air stream, but only a slight imprm-e\-rere tried on the @ect of
ment resulted in the steadiness of the flow. Some experim@s
the shape of exit cone and it was found

that a straight

cone in all cases ga-re the highest

-

46

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY CO1l.MITTEEFOR AERONAUTICS.

efficiency, The effect of placing a closed room ~bout the model tunnel of the same proportional size as the building on the &foot tunnel decreased the speed for the same power l%
per cent. Several spinners were placed about the propeller in the moclel tunrrel in the hope
that they would give increased efficiency and a steadier flow, but in no case ~as there any
improvement.
Repo~t No. 99, entitled “ Accelerations in Flight,)’ by 1?. H. Norton m-id E. ‘1?. Allen,
Langley Memorial Aeronautical
Laboratory.—This
report deals -with the accelerations ob‘The instrument. used in these tests
Field.
tained in flight on various airplanes at
IJa@ey

was a recording
Advisory

accelerometer

~ommittee

for

of z new type designed by the technical
stafi of the h~ational
The instrurn.ent consists of a flat steel spring sLtpAeronautics.

ported rigidly
at one end so that the free encl may be cleflected by its o-rim we@t
from its
neutral position by my acceleration
acting at right angles to the plane of the spring.
This
cleflection is measured by a very light ti~ting mirror caused to rotate by the deflection of the
spring, -which reflected the beam of light onto a moving film.
TIN motion .of the spring is
damped by a thin aluminum vane which rotates -with the spring between the poles of an eIectric
magnet,. Records were taken ofi landings and tal>e,offs, in loops, spins, spirals, and rolls.

It was found that the loading in x fairly heavy hmcling reached a maximum of 5 g., in a.
0
loop it reached a maximum of about 3.7 ~. ~ in a spjn a maximum of-about 3 g., while in ~
roll it attained the value of 4.2 g,, showing that this maneu~-er puts a greater strwin on the
airplane than any other. A JN-4H was pulled as suddenly as possible out of a clive at 50,
60, 70, and 80 miles an hour. The records S11OW
that the time elapsed between pulling the
stick back and reaching the maximum acceleration was independent of the air speed and
amounted to about 0.9 seconcls. These. accelerations are slightly lo~er tlan the theoretical
accelerations that would be obtained if the airplane were suddenly turned to the angle of
maximum lift. It was also found that an airplane hacl a certain definite period of vibration
which could be excited by the engine, but which was not at all dependent upon it, as the
vibrations were nearly as evident when the airplane ~as gliding -with a dead stick. This
periocl of vibration appeared to be in-rersely proportional to the -weight of the airplane
It is
concluded from these tests that in no reasonable stunting would the loacl in flying ever exceed
a factor of four and one-half times the normal stress.
Report LVO.100, entitled “Accelerometer Desibw,” by E. P; Warner and F. H. Korton,
Langley Memorial .4eronautical
Laboratory.—In
connection with the development of an
accelerometer for measuring the loads on airplanes in free flight a study of the theory of such
instruments has been made, and the results of this study are summarized in this report.
Portion of the analysis cleals particularly with the sources of error and with the limitations placed
The discussion of the dynamics of-the
on the location of the instrument in the airplane.
accelerometer includes a study of its theoretical motions and of the way in -which they are
affected by the natural period of vibration and by the damping, together with a report of some
experiments on the effect of forced vibrations on the record.
Report Ii’o. 101, entitled” The Calculated Performance of Airplanes Equipped with SuperPart I of this report are precharging Engines,” by E, C. Kemble, Harvard lTni-rersity.-In
sented the theoretical performance curves of an airplane engine equipped with a supercharging
In predicting the gross power of a smpereharging engine, the writer uses temperacompressor.
ture and pressure correction factors based on experiments made at the Bureau of Standards
Means for estimating the temperature rise in
(cf. Reports No. 45 and 46 of this committee).
the compressor are outlined.
Since the compressor wil~ be clesigned for a definite normal pressure ratio, the gross power output under normal conditions is easily computed when the intake
In the case of a gear-driven compressor, the net power is obtained
temperature is known.
by subtracting the power absorbed by the compressor from the gross power.
For use in deter.
mining the size and power absorption of. the compressor needed in a given case, a formula for
the variation of the volumetric efficiency of the motor with intake temperature and exhaust
pressure is derived.
q

AllN_UALREPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMXITWEE

I?ORAERONAWCICS.

47

In ealc.uIating the power output of an engine fitted with a turbine-driven cmnpr=~or, it is
~.med
tba~ the back pr=%ure created by the turbine is equal to the increase in the carburetor
pressure produced by the blower.
A grapfica~ method is outlined whereby

performance

curves

for either t~~e of engine-

compressor unit at aH speeds and altitudes may be laid out with the aid of assumed comComparative
performance
curves for a Liberty engine operat%
pressor characteristics.
with a turbine-driwn
compressor, a gear-driven compressor, and without supercharg@2
are
A discussion of the relative fuel consumption of superderived in an i.Wxstrative calculation.
charging and nonsupercharging
enagines -when the carburetor is adjusted for maximum power
is appended.
Part 2 of this report presents an estimation of the performance
curves of an airp~ane
fitter with a supercharging engine. If the heat leak from gas turbine and exhaust pipes to the
water jackets is pre-rented, and the cooling system is kept under constant pressure, rLoadditional
radiator equipment should be required when a supercharging compressor is fitted to an airplane
engine.
A method of estimating zirplane performance at altitudes with the aid of curves for the
“ reduced” thrust horsepower available and required, is de~eloped.
This method simpl&es the
graphs of the thruss horsepower required at altitudes, and is particularly useful in comparing
the performance of airplanes of dif?erent sizes, wing loadings, and propelling plant. characterTwo methods for drawing curves of the
istics, which have the same lift and drift coefficients.
thrust horsepower available with a variable pitch propeller are indicated.
In an illustrative example horizontal flight speed and maximum climbing speed curves are
worked out for the Lepere two-seater fighter -when equipped with supercharbtig
and nonsupercharging e.ugines~ and with both fixed and variable pitch propellers.
These are supplemented by altitude-time curvas at maximum climbing rate and curves showing the relative fuel
economy (i. e.> relative distance traversed per pound of fuel) in horizontal fight -with the
engine -wide open at all altitudes.
A supercharging
installation suitable for commercial use is described, and it is shown
that -with the aid of the compressor a ~geat saving in fuel and a considerable increa~ in
carrying capacity can be effected simultaneously.
In an appendix the writer deri~es a theoretical formukt for the correction of the thruss
coefficient of an airscrew to offset the added resistance of the airplane due to the slip-stream
effect.
of Liberty-12. Engine~’ by S. W. Sparrow and
Report No. 102, entitled “ Performance
H. S. White, Bureau of Standards.-In
cooperation with the Engineering Division of the Air
Service of the United States Army, a lXberty-12 engine has been tested at the Bureau of
Standards.
The program of tests was planned to yield that information
considered most
important in determining the value of the engine for aviation.
Full pow-er runs were made
at the ground! at 25,~
feet> and at several intermediate altitudes.
To determine the mechanical efficiency of the engine; friction horsepower was measured at the ground and at 151000 feet.
As a basis for predicting engine performance with a propeller, a series of tests was made in
which the dynamometer load ad enghe throttle were adjwted at each speed to simulate the
engine load -which would be imposed at thzt speed by a propelIer operating under normal fd.1
load at 1,700 r. p. m.
Among the quantities cakulated from the test measurements are: Brake horsepower;
rn.idure ratio; mechanical, thermal, and
brake mean effecti~e prwsure; fuel consumption;
vokmetric eficiency; and the percentage of the heat in the fuel appearing in the jacket water
and in the exhaust.
Jacket water temperature, oil temperature, manifold pressure, etc., are
recorded to show the conditions under which the test was made.
The provision on the carburetor for adjusting the mixture ratio is shown to be inadequ~te
at aItitudes abo~e 15#00 feet. Improving the mechanical efficiency of the enggine and maldng
such changes as will pre~ent the present decrease of vohmetric
efficiency with increase of
altitude are suggested as two possibilities of improtig
the altitude performance of the engine.
54339-214

.

.-

48

AXTNWAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY cmMMITTEE

FOR.AEFK)ii;AUTIC%.

Report No. 103, entitled “ Performance
of Hispano-Suiza
300-horsepower Engine:’
by
S. V?. Sparrow and H. S. White, Bureau of Standards.-A
300-horsepower Hispano-Suiza
engine Has been tested at the Bureau of Standards.
The program of tests was plarmed in
cooperation with the Engineering Division of the Air Service of the United States Army and
was intended primarily &o determine the characteristic performance of the engine at various
altitudes. The engine was operatecl at the ground? at 251000 feet? and at intermediate altitucles,
both at full load and at loads similar to those that would be imposed upon the engine at
various speeds by a propeller whose. normal full-load speed was 1,800 r. p. m. Friction horsepower also wzs determined in order that the mechanical efficiency of the engine might be
calculated.
From the test data there were computed the brake horsepower;
brake mean effeetive
pressure; specific fuel consumption ; mixture ratio; jacket loss; exhaust 10SS; and thermal,
mechanical, and volumetric efficiencies. A record of jacket water temperatures, oil temperatures, manifold pressures, etc .>shows the con{ltions under which thk test was made.
A brake horsepower of 352 was obtained at 2,200 r. p. m. and. a maximum brake meall
effective pressure of 128 pounds per square inch at about 1,600 r. p. m. The mechanical efEciency varied from 88 per cent to $3 per cent from speeds of 1:400 r. p. m. to 2,200 r. p. m,,
-whiIe the brake thermal efficiency, based on the lower calorific value of the fuel, was about-26
per cent over this speed range. At 1,800 r. p. m. ~nd at an air density of 0.040 pounds per
cubic foot the brake horsepower was about 42 per cent and the indicated horsepower about 47
per cent of that at the ground.
Report A70. 10~, entitled ‘{ Torsion of Nring Trusses at Di~ing Speeds/’ by Roy G. Miller,
Langley Memorial Aeronautical
Laboratory.-It
is tile ptlrpose of this report to indicate
what effect the distortion of a typical loaded wing @lss will have upon the load distribution.
The case of high angle of incidence may be dismissed immediately from consideration as the
loads on the f rent “and rear trusses are nearly balanced, and consequently there -will be little
A given an~wlar distortion .v@ have the maximum effect upon load
angular distortion.
distribution in the region of the angle of no-fift, becallse the slope Of t~le lift-curve is l~igl~est
here, and it is here that the greatest angular distortion will occur, because the load on the
front truss acts downward while the loacl on the rear truss acts upward.
The. RAF–15 aerofoil was chosen as most typical of present-day wing sections ancl serves
This was combined with the JN-4 wing truss, a biplane -with
for an illustrative example.
Starting -with the assumption of a loading for a rigid structure,
overhanging upper wings.
The assumption of loading for the second
the wing truss and the deflections were calculated.
trial was based upon the deflections as determined by the first trial, After several approximations it-was possible to-compute accurately the angular distortion at each panel point.
It -was found that no great angular distortion occurred at panel points where there was
acleqnate stagger bracing but- that it was considerable at the tip of the overhanging portion
In conclusion, it may be said that it is not worth the added complication
of the upper wing.
to correct the load distribution on the con_rentional biplane for wing truss clistmtion but
that it WOUICI highly advisable in the case of a mrrnoplane, where the wires of the ~ift truss
be
make an acute angle with the spars and where there can be nothing to take the place of stagger
bracing.
It would also be aclvisable. in the case of the internally braced wing -where” the
relative deflection is likely to be high.
h?eport No. 105, entitlecl ‘{ Angles of–Attacl< and Air Speeds During Maneuversl”
\lTarner and F. H. Norton, Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory.-In
information as to the nature of maneuvers and as to the maneuverability

by IL P.

seeking f urther
characteristics of

airplanes, continuous measurements of the angles of attack and air speeds at several points
along the wings ha-re been made during spins and loops.
Very striking results have been
obtained with reference to the roiling velocity and the distribution of load in spins and the
variation of the angle of attack in loops> a surprisingly large range of angle being experienced
during S1OWloops.
This work is fully described in Technical Report No. 105.

.-

ANNUAL

49

REPORT ATATIONAL ADVISORY COM31KKCEE FOR AERONACJTI@.

A’eport .Yo. 10$, entitlecl “ Turbulence in the Air Tubes of Rdators
for Aircraft Engines;’
by S. R. Parsons, Bureau of Standards.—The
existence of t.urbulent. flow .in the air passages
of aircraft radiators and of -narrations in character or cle=gee of turbulence with different
types of construction is sho-wn by the f ollowhg experimedal
evidence:
(1) Pressure ~adient.s along the air tubes are roughly proportional to the 1.7 power of
the speed, -which is characteristic of turbulent flow in long circular tubes of the
same diameters.
(2) The surface coo%g
coefficients of rzdiators vary widely (0.002 to 0.007) when
expressed as heat dissipated per unit time, per unit cooling surf ace., per unit
temperature dift’erence between air and water, and at a gi~en a-renage linear speed
through the tubes.
(3) A fine -wire electrically heated shows different cooling coefficients in the air tubes of
clitlerent. radiators.
(4) Temperature gradients in the air tubes are of the form characteristic of turbuIent
flow and fail to show sudden breaks such as might inclicate a dividing Line between
regions of viscous and of turbulent flow.
The use of special devices for increasing turbulence may increase the heat transfer per
unit surface for a gi~en flow of air through the radiator but such practice clecreases that flow
for a g-i-i-en speed of flight and increases head resistance.
At very 10-w fly~w speeds, or in
czsw where the radiator is mounted in the nose of the fuselage, turbulence devices ma-y someto
the writer is detrimental to the general
times be used to acl-m-ntage~but e~ery type krlo~n
performance of the radiator at high speeds.
i}’~.
107, entitled “.% High-speed
En=gine l?ressure
indicator
of the Balanceci
l?ep~t
Diaphragm
describes
grams
met~lod
the

Type,”

by ~.

of high-speed
giving

balanc.~ng

side of a metal

the
of

device.

a-rerage

of

the engine
cliaphra=m

The

and F. B. 3Te_ivell, Bureau

de-rice

especially

internal-combustion

the phase_ of the engine
timing

c. Dickinson

a pressure-measuring

number
pressure

of negligible

cycle

reporb

enegines.

a large

cylinder

zdapted
of

stiffness.

briefly

cards

engine

a@nst

to -ivhich a pressure

discusses

The

for

of Standards.-This

USS in mapping
are obtained

cycles.

The

a measured

In its application
measurement

the errors

which

—

—

..—

report

indicator

dia-

by a point-to-point
principle

premme

in-iol~eil

on the

as an engine

corresponds

must be a~oided

is

opposite
indicator

is selected

–.-

by a

in the de~elop-

of m indicator
for light high-speecl
engines, where ~ibration is serious, and outlines
the principles underlying the desiag of this instrument in order to be free of such errorq.
.: detailed description of the instrument and accessories follows, together with operating
The indicator has been used sucdirections.
Specimen indicator diagrams are appended.
cessfu.Uy at speeds up to 2,600 r. p. m.l the highest speed en@ne a-railable for trial. Its sensitivity is approximately that of a stanclard 6-inch clial gauge of the Bourbon tube type.
Eepwrt i~o. 108, entitled “ Some Factors of AirpIane Engine 17erformance~’ by ?Tictor R.
Gage, Bureau of Standards.-This
report -was prepared for the National Advisory Committee
for .&eronautics and is based upon an. anzlysis of a large number of airplane-engine
tests
made at the Bureau of Standards.
This report contains the results of a search for fundamental relations between many variables of engine operation.
The data used came from o~er 100 groups of tests made upon $wwd
engims, priThe types of ennties were the Liberty 12 and three modmardy for military information.
els of the 13ispano-Suiza.
The tests were made in the altitude chamber, where conditions
simulated aRitucles up to about 30:000 feet, -with engine speeds ranging from 11200 to 2,200
r. p. m. The compression ratios of the different ennties ranged from under 5 to o~er 8 to 1.
The data taken on the tests were exceptionally complete, including variations of pressure and
temperature, besides the brake ancl friction torques, rates of fuel ancl air consumption, the
jacket and exhaust heat losses.
With the Liberty engine operating at from 500 to 2,000 r. p. -m. and wit~ the 14ispanoSuiza 300 horsepower operating from 1,400 to 2,@0 r. p. m. it is found that the friction torque

ment

—

..
——

.——

—.
,.

.
ANNUAL REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

50

increases approximately
as a linear functiion of enatie speed at a given air density, and approximately as a linear function of density at a constant speecl. This means that the friction
horsepower increases approximately
as the square of the speed. Actually the relation of
torque and speed is such that the friction. horsepowm increases with speed raised to a power
between the first and second, this power increasing with speed, approaching the square. The
relation- depends upon the engine design, the speed> and density of the air. Any statements
as to the distribution of the friction losses are based upon incomplete evidence; the indications
are> however, that the pumping losses are about half of the total friction.
There is no doubt that for a given process of combustion ancl a-t a cmw%nt speed the
in other vvorcls, proengine power is directly proportions] to the weight of charge supplied;
portional
ing

to the charge

conditions

proportional
perature

are

density

at the beginning

of-compression.

constant except for altitude,
The volumetric
eficiency
to the air density.

at constant

the temperature

sensibly

pressure,

is raised,

so that power

due to changes

As a consequence,

if operat-

the engine power will be closely
increases -with increase of air tem-

does not clecrease ZS fasb as the air density

in vapor%ation

when

and heat transfer.

Report iVo. 109, entitled” Experimental Research on Air Propellers, IV,” by _RT. ?. Durancl
l
and E. P. Lesley, Leland Stanford University. —This report is a continuation of a report on
the same subject published in the fifth annual report. The research was conducted in the aerodynamical laboratory of Leland Stanford Junior University, and the report prepared under
The report states the results of
the direction of Dr. W. l?. Durand and Prof. E. P. Lesley.
investigations made upon numerous propeller models at the request of the subcommittee on
aerodynamics, and contains valuable data to those interested in the desiam of air propellers.
The discussion accompanying the report is necessarily somewhat brief, as the report is to be a
part of the general report which will include a review of all tha propeller investigations that
This general report will be ready
have been conducted at Leland Stanford Junior University.
for publication

with the seventh annual report of the committee.

Report A’o. J1O, entitled “ The Altitude Effect on Air Speed Indicators;’

by M. D. Hersey,
Franklin L. Hunt, and Herbert N. Eaton, of the Bireau of Standards.-The
object of this
paper is to present the results of a theoretical and experimental stucly of the effect, on the performance of air speed indicators, of the different atmospheric conditions experienced at various
altitudes, This matter has ordinarily been handled in a very simple way by following the PV 2
law and therefore correcting the observed reading of the air speed indicator by assuming the
differential pressure developed to be directly proportional
to the density and independent of
any other physical property of the air.
The failure of certain types of air speed indicator to follow the simple PV 2 law at very
For example, in the case of the I?itot tube,
10-wor very high speeds is already well recognized.
more accurate results can be deduced at high speeds by considering, in addition to the- density
.4gain, in the case of the Venturi, a departure from the
of the air, its adiabatic compression.
Iaw of proportionality
to the square of the speed has been recognized also at 10-wspeeds; consequently, as shown in this paper, a corresponding departure must be expected at a sufficiently
high altitude, even -without going to the lower speeds,
Thermodynamic
formulas are available indicating the probable performance of Pitot tubes
at high speeds where compressibility has to be consiclerecl, but all efforts which have thus far
been made to arrive at a sufficiently complete formula for the Venturi tube by purely deductive
reasoning have pro~en impracticable, on account of the clifliculty of treating viscosity and
turbulence.
An adequate method of analysis for such problems has, however, been found in
dimensional reasoning, for by this means the minimum number of experimental data needed
for providing an absolutely complete inductive rather than deducti~e solution can be determined.
In this -way in the present paper the general form of the relation exprwsing the
pl’essure generated in terms of the size of the instrument, its -velocity through the air, and the
density, viscosity, and elasticity of the medium has been derived,
It is shown how all of the
last five physical quantities can be reduced to only two independent variables, one involving
the viscosity and the other the elasticity or compressibility “of the air. Thus the equation be-

ANNUAL
comes simply
curves

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY c!o~

that of an ordinary

the experimental

The experiments
ments

reported

to cletermine

surface

observations

the degree

of dynamical

whether

compressibility

at reduced

pressure,

i. e., a vacuum

airplane

observations

in three cooriltiates.

can be represented

all relate to Venturi

to discover

E FOR AERONAUTICS.

They

wind tunnel,
check

include

attainable

has to be taken into account;

as a practical

or family

of

graphically.

tubes.

similarity

13y such a surface

51

to determine

on the laborat.or~

water

between

channel

air and water

observations

and

in a -ivind stream

the effect of density
results;

experi-

and viscosity;

also ordinary

wind

tunnel

tests.
The

results

by these

ha-re been reduced
outlined
results

abo~e.
available

of air-speed
chart

Li

both

is sufficiently

fcmei=~l

for

mo~

basis

of importance

eorre.ction

LIST OF TECHNICALNOTES ISS~

No,

and

under

instruments

are all in qualitative
compariwn

a chart

performance

experimental

is primartiy

-well gi-rea

methods

qnant.itatire

of the paper

American

for the altitude

for

the relative

the necessary

investigation

tude flight,

experimental
basis

the conclusion

to date for

nozzle

provicles
This

various

to a common

is @-ren

coritainin~

charaeterktiw

inYolving
for

computing

the conditions

tube

altitude

By NAmo~~
A~VLS@RY~=zTEE
FAST YEAR.

t,ypW
This

corrections.
flight

or &ah

alti.

near sea le-rel

PV z ~a-w.

——

_

FOR =IZONAUmCS DURWG !mn

on
By Edward P. Warner.
1, Nlotes Longitudinal Stability and Balance.
Engine.
2. Airplane Performance as Influenced by the Use of a Super~arged
de Bothezat.
By Ed-ward P. Warner.
3. Notes on the Theory of the Accelerometer.
4.
5.
6.
7.

probable

combinations.

-with low speed

of hi@-speecl

by the simple

the most

arid

raethod

of five well-~o~

Venturi

in connection

a~eement.

by the graphical

By George

The Problem of the 33eIicopter.
By Edward P. Warner.
Relation of Rib Spacing to Stress in Wing Planes.
By A. l?. Zahm,

Static Testing and Proposed Standard Specifications.
By Edward P. Farner.
Notes on the Desiago of Supercharged and Overdimensioned
Aircraft Motors.
‘lY-mslated from Technische Berichte, Vol. III, sec. 5. By S&wager.
By E. Unger and E. Schmidt.. Translated from Technische Berichte,
8. Duralumin.
Vol. 111, SeC.6.
9. Abstract of Theory of Lifting Surfaces, Part L By L. Prandtl, 1918. Prepared by
Paris office.
10.Abstract of Theory of Lh%ng Surfaces, Part II. By L. Prandtl, 1919. Prepared by
Paris office.
By Ren6 DeviUers.
11.The Problem of the Turbo-Compressor.
Recent Efforts and Experiments in the Construction of Aviation Enaginw.
If?.
13.
14.
15.
16.
1’7.
18.

Translated

from Technische Berichte, Vol. III, sec. 5. By Sch-wager.
Soaring Flight in Guinea.
13y P. E1.rac.
Increase in Matium
Pressures Produced by Preibgmition in hternal
Combustion
Engines.
By S. W. Sparrow.
Tests of the DaimIer D IVa Engine at a High Altitude Test Bench. By W. G. Noack.
Translated from Technische Berichte, Vol. III, sec. 1.
Experience with Geared Propeller Dri-res for Atiation Engines.
By Kutzbach.
Italian and French Experiments on. Wind Tunnels. By W. K Knight.
The Dynamometer Hub. By W. Stieber. Translated from Technische 13erichte, Vol.

III, sec. 6.
19. The Steadiness Factor
Qo. hTotes on spetications

in Engine Sets. By W. Margonlis.
for French Airplane Competitions.
By W. Margoulis.
21. Drag or Negative Traction of Geared-Down Supporting Propellers in the Downward
Vertical GIide of a Helicopter.
By A. Toussaint.

——
.

-

52

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORS C-OiUMITTEEFOR AERONAUTICS.
RESEARCH PROGRAN1 AND ESTI~lATES.

For the year 1922 the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics has planned a comprehensive program of aeronautical research, which in the opinion of the committee covers the
most important features that have to do with the further development of power plants for aircraft, aerodynwnimd impro~-ernents in %ircraftt and new materials for aircraft.
Aerodynamic
wseavch.-The
program of aeroclynamical research is to be carried out-with
a vie-w to-the successful de-velopment of an airplane incorporating
an internally braced wing
structure. in order to eliminate practically all of the structural resistance, a factor which greatly
The program includes research
handicaps the perf orrnance of the present type of _airplane.
on the aeroclynamical characteristics of airplane structures? including wings and fuselage, that
are applicable to all-metal and internally braced types of construction.
The research is to be
carried on both in the wind tunnel and in free flight, so that by an examination of the performance of full-scale airplanes using the new type _of construction as compared with the performance indicated by experiments on models in the wind tunne~ further knowledge of the
scale factor between moclel and full-scale performance may be obtained.
The aerodynamical
research program also contains provision for the determination of the variation of loading
along the span for the thick wing sections which are likely to be used in all-metal, internally
needed in the design of these new
braced designs. TLis research will supply clatvmzvpmich
types of machines, which, because of their structural permanency, their high load carrying
capacity, and their high maximum speecl, -will undoubtedly be the airplanes of the future.
In free flight testing the program provides for the complete performance tests of airplanes
to determine accurately the aerodynamical
characteristics of the airplane, especicdly -with
reference to their stability, so that information may be obtained that will aid the dasigning
engineer to predict accurately the performance of a new airplane.
The outstanding feature
of the airplane over other means of transportation is the high speed at which it is possible to
fly, and it is appreciated that if the airplane is to become an important factor in transportation
the etlkient operating speed of the airplane must be m~terially increased.
The program contemplates a research with the aim of obtaining those characteristics of an airplane that make
for high operating speecls and a large speed range. The research program also includes the
development-of new instruments to aid in air navigation and new instruments to be used in the
Jccurate performance tests of airplanes.
Experimental research for the determination of the
pressure distribution over the surface of an airplane and its controls is provided for, and iikewise the distribution over the surface of an airship and its controlling members.
The data
obtained will enable the engineer to clesign the structure more accurately, as he -will know
clefinitely the forces acthg on the structure under all operating conditions,
The committee asks for the sum of $215,000 to carry out research work in connection
-with aerodynamics.
MaieriaZs 7*esearcfi.—-The subcommittee on materia 1sfor aircraf t has brought to the attention
of the main committee the fa-ct that-since the armistice ail-metal construction of airplanes has
received the careful attention of airplane manufacturers in Europe, -with the result that apparently successful models have been constructecl. The war -was fought with machines constructed
of wood> which from many standpoints is most unsatisfactory
especially from a constructional point of view. WOO& has a nonhomogeneous structure, is uncertain in strength and
-weight; -warps and crzcks, and weakens rapidly when exposed to moisture.
The ad vantages-of using metal construction for zirplanes are apparent, as the metal does not splinterl is
more homogeneous, and the properties of the material are much better known and can be
reliecl upon.
Metal also can be produced
in large quantities, and it is felt that in the future
all large airplanes must necessarily be constructed of metal. The program for the year 1922
provides for experiment al uesearch in the development of light alloys of aluminum and
magnesium base for use in aircraft.
Aluminum alloys are now being produced that have the
same physical properties as mild steel, with one-third the weight,, and the program further pro-

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE

yOR AERONAUTICS.

53

tides for the de-relopment of light alloys, especially in connection with their heat treatment and
method of fabrication.
The physical properties of light alloys are not accurately known, especially with reference to the fatigue resistance properties of the material, aml the program
provides for experimental research corering this phase of the problem.
This research -wfi be carried on under the direction of the subcommittee on materiaLs
for aircraft and -will be con~ncted by pri-rate corporations,
and ako by the Xavy and the
Army Air Service interested in the production of the material.
A cronaufk
~ower Plant Research.—The
future progress of civil and military aviation is
so fundamentally
dependent upon the dw-elopment of highly reliable ancl economical power
plants that the problems connected with increasing these features of aircraft power-plant operation are considered to be among the most important at present demanding the attention of
aeronautical research laboratories.
The capital in-restment.~ maintenance charges, and fuel cost
are all very high in the case of the present aircraft engine and must be materially lowered
before the cost of power can be reduced to figures which will make possible the extensi~e
The shortage and high cost of aviation
development of commercial and pleasure aviation.
gmoline, as m-en as the complication and relative unreliability of the carburetion and i~gytition
systems: emphatically indicate the necessity for the de~elopment of an engine which will operate
b-y direct hydraulic injection of lo-w-grade fuel, with compression sufficiently high to ensure
automatic ignition.
The committee feel that the early de-relopment of an enbtie of this type
is one of the most important technical problems invol~ed in the growth of commercial aviation
in this country> and the research program for tke coming yem- provides for extensi~e work in
this fielcL
Perhaps the next most important power-plant. problem is the elimination of the waterroo]ing system, it. being at present agreed that the adcled complication;
-weight, and head
resistance of the indirecb cooling system are to be” considered as fundamentally .unecessmy
handicaps to pomer-plant performance and reliability, and that these must ultimately be overcome. Although considerable research has been conducted upon the direct cooIing of engine
cylinclers, the resuIts must be considered as merely indicative> and much yet remains to be done
before the successful and economical direct cooLing of aircraft engines will become possible,
especially -with cylinders of large dimensions and high specific power output.
The program
covers the requirements in this problem in a comprehensi-re manner.
The perfecting of supercharges, or other means for securing the maximum power output
of aviation engines at all altitudes> is considered to be one of the vital problems? and the proa~am
protides for a continuation of the research examination of the many possibilities offered in this
field. All o-f those applications of commercial, military, and pleasure aviation -which depend
upon high speed for their successful fulfil~ment can only reach their complete cle-relopment
through flying at high altitudes with power plants capable of maintaining a high percentage of
their maximum power output and equipped with -i-ariable pitch or variable characteristic
propellers.
‘The program also contains protiion
for continuing the performance tests of new types
and improved forms of aircraft engines in the altitude chamber; the performance tests of all
engine accessories such as carburetors: ignition appliances? lubrication appliances: and cooling
appliances, including radiators in the form of complete units and also sample cores; and the
study of other interesting de-relopments of important engine details> such as pistons, valves, etc.
The estimate of the committee to cotier the necessary power-plant research for the fiscal
year of 1922 is $131,600.
In connection with the research on pmverplant and aerodynamic problems at Langley
Field the committee maintains shop facilities at the Langley Memorial Aermautical
Laboratory. the estimated expenses of which for the year 1922 are $%8,666.
iYummary.-The
committee’s estimates for the prosecution of the programs of aerodynamical research, ,materials research: and aeronautic power plant research? as outlined abo-i-e,
total $405#66. To this shoulcl be added: under the committee on publications and intelligence,

.

—

-.

—.

54

ANNUAL

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY C031MlTTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

the -work of the Office of Aeronautical Intelligence in the collection, classification, and dissemination of scientific and technical reports and data on aeronautics, requiring the sum of
$59,800, and for the genwxd administration of the Washington office with ii% present personnel, the sum of $24,540, making the total estimates for the fiscal year 1922, $489,906. The
appropriation for the fiscal year 1920 was $175,000, and for the present fiscal year the appropriation was increased to $200,000. The continuous prosecution of a -well organized phm of
scientific research is an essential factor in the development–of the science of aeronautics, and
the increased estimates of the committee for the fiscal year 1922” are made necessary by the increasing relative importance of scientific research in- the general scheme of a national aviation
policy, as outlined in the closing section of this report.
FINANCIAL REPORT.
The appropriation
for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics for the fiscal
year ] 920, as carried in the sundry civil appropriation act approved July 19, 1919, was $175,000,
under which the committee reports expenditures and obligations during the year amounting
to $174.#96.75, itemized as follows:
SaIaries (including engineering staff) ----------------------------------------------------Wages --------------------------------------------------------------------------___ -- —----_- —_ —
---------Equipment _--__----_. __-_ --__ -_-__ -_-__ .--__ -_—-----—
Supplies ________________________________________________ —_- —- — ---- — - —___________
—--------------------------------------Transportation and communication ------Travel ________________________________________
-– _____— ____________________
Special investigations and reports ------------------------------------------------------Construction of buildiMs----_--_
-____ .-_— ____________ — - —____________________________
Tot81-----------------------------------------------------------------------

$65,299. 5S
23,559.51
~, 533457
19,493.22
~ 281.42
6,066.58
40,716.39
5,840.50
174,296.75

CONCLUSION.
A NATIONAL AVIATION POLICY.
Aviation activities
during the war were concentrated

on the development and production
The selection of the landing fields that were established was necessarily
of military aircraft.
The close of the war found us with a.n aeronautic industry
guided by military considerations.
at the stage of quantity production, a large amount of aircraft material on hand, a largb
number of- trained flyers, and a few scattered landing tiekl.s. In brief, all this constituted
the national inheritance from the investment of hundreds of millions of dollars for the hurried
development of military aviation during the war. In the two years that have elapsed since
the armistice a good proportion of the aircraft material has become obsolete.
A majority of
the technicaI personnel and trained flyers have returned to civil life. and to pursuits not
connected with aviation.
The great aircraft industry has almost disappeared, and some of
Those that have been retained really represent one
the landing fields have been surrendered.
of the most valuable physical assets salvaged from our aircraft expenditures.
AS a nation we must seek to realize clearly the lessons of the war and to profit by them,
Our efforts in the development of a military air force and the organization of an aircraft
inciustry during the war were remarkable accomplishments in themselves, but the handicap
of a negligible industry at-the outbreak of the war and the general lack of technical knowledge
-were too great to be satisfactorily overcome in a short time, regardless of the money available.
Ii, is now our clear duty to take to heart the lessons and mistakcs of the -war period and to
shape a national aviation policy that will be, productive of the greatist possible structural
development consistent with prudent economy.
The Government agencies actively concerned -with the use of- aviation at the present time
are the Army Air Service, the lYaval .4ir Service! and the Postal Air Service.
Other agencies
sucn as the Geological Survey, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Forest Servicet etc; hfive
more or less need for the use of aircraft in their work. The National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics is concerned not so much -withthe promotion of the uses of aviation as with the

“

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISORY (20 MIT’JXE FOR AERONAUTK3S.
M

ANNUAL

55

...—

sclentidc study of the problems irnwl-red and the technical de-relopment of the art for the
benefit of governmental agencies and of the public generally, but the committee believes that
the use of aircraft by the various governmental
agencies should be encouraged where its
eilicient use is practicable;
also that the general development of aviation for all purposeE
shouId be encouraged by the National Government.
The faithful performance of our national
duties in these respects becomes compelling from considerations of wise military preparedness.
In time of -war aviation -will probably be the first arm o-f offense and defense to come into
action. For this there must be an established industry and a trained and active air service.
Aerial supremacy at the outset of hostilities -would be a tremendous military advantage.
UMmate victory would unquestionab~y incline to the side that could estabIish and maintain
supremacy in the air. Huge expenditures of money in time of danger and frantic eflorts to
tram perymnel and to develop hastily an aircraft industry from almost nothing will not do.
There must be wise preparedness; there must be in healthy existence at least a nucleus of an
industry capable of adequate expansion; there must etist civil aad commercial aeronautical
activities in all parts of the country which would be the main support of the industry in time
of peace. In pure self-defense the Government must encourage the development of commerThe alternative proposition
is the creation and maintenance of a powerful
cial aviation.
standing military air service relatively self-reliant in time of -war. We ean not, howe-rerl
afford the expense which such a poLicy -wouId eniaiI, and there would he no advantage in time
of peace from such expenditures comparable in any way to the advantages to be gained from
We shouId Maintain an active air service in time of peace,
the support of civil aviation.
which

should

ex_panslon
ion

to furnish

Transport
automobile

possess

in time

inherent
strength
In the final

a military

Service
industry.

and be
analysis,

of -war.
during
The

and tcI do this -we must

reserve

The

force.

the -war -were only
problem

enter

remarkable

‘accomplishments

our aircraft

industry

in a healthy

in itself

the

in the

policy

fostering

of

form “of promoting

for

Motor
of

our

condition>
commercial
unprepared

considerations,

sound

our

The relative cost of fostering
an organized
plan to develop
of civil aviation.
av~ation ~otid
be much 1than the waste that would inevitably
result from
returns

a sane,

condition

de-relopment

military

upon

of

by the healthy

possible

the

Aside from
entry into war.
-wotid in time yield adequate

delay

something
more than a mere nucleus
for
hovve~er, -we must depend upon civil aviat-

made

is to place

without

——

commercial

aviation

and strengthening

our means of transportation,
advancing
the pro=gress of c&ilization,
and increasing
wealth.
Aviation
is a distinct advance in civilization
given to the -world by America.

the natioml
The

impor-

tance of the de-relopment
of aviation
from a military
standpoint
-was not full-y appreciated
before the war, with the consequent
lack of encouragement
of the development
of the art.
The handicap
of years of comparative
inactivity
hits not yeti been overcome.
we can not
we can not go backward,
but must go for-ivarcl
afiord to repeat the mistakes of the past.
with the intelligent

development

of aviation

in all its branckxs.

Aviation
is still in its infancy ~ its possibilities,
vvhtie un?mo-wn, appeal to the imaa@ation.
The forced development
during the -war and some of the eqerimental
development
since

have

not been based

upon

scientfic

research

and

sound

scientfic

principles

that

make

Technical training is necessary, including education in ad~nced
aeronautical engineering, so is the actual training of a large body of men ‘b the technique
of the care and operation of aircra-ft. Broadly speaking, scierkfie research, technical training, and commercial aviation constitute, or shoukl constitute, the backbone of a natiomd
policy.
“Reducing to definite form the steps which in the opinion of the ITational Advisory Committee for Aeronautics are wise and timely, the committee, after careful consideration of all
the facts within its knowledge, submits the fo~o-wing specific recommendations:
First. That legislation be enacted providing for Federal regulation of commercial air
navigation, licensing of pilots, aircraft, landing fiekls~ etc. At the present time there is no
authority Of law for anY executive agency of the Government to perform such duties. The
for

substantial

progrws.

.—

56
committee

.4FHWTAL REPORT

NATIONAL

ADVISORY CXHKNXITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

believes that for the executive administration of these new

there should be establishedin the Department
of a commissioner
Advisory

Committee

OfliceDepartments,

of commerce

of air navigation, -who should also become
for Aeronautics.

duties of government

a bureau of aeronautics in charge
a member

of the National

Acting in cooperation -with the Warf

Navy,

the committee has prepared a draft of legislationwh;ch

in a preceding section of this report under

the heading

Activitiesin Aeronautics,” and which it strongly recommends

“ Organization

and Post

appears in full

of Governmental

for the immediate consideration

of Congress.
In this connection the committee recommences also the adoption of a policy of
Federal aid to the States in the establishment of landing fields for general use in every State
in the TJnion.
Seconcl. That the Congress authorize an American airplane competition in order to stimulate
private endeavor in the development of new and improved designs of aircraft, the competition
to be under the direciion of the National .4dvisory Committee for Aeronautics, the entries of
the successful competitors to be purchased by the Government-at
a predetermined
and
announced figure and made available for the use of the Postal Air Service.
Third. That adequate appropriations be made for the military and naval air services in
order to–permit the continuous development of these exceedingly important arms of the two
services> and to enable them to place orders in such a way as to maintain a nucleus of an aircraft industry capable of sufficient. expansion to meet miIit+ary needs in time of emergency.
The committee considers this absolutely essential.
Fourth. That the eontrol of naval activities in aeronautics be centralized under a naval
bureau of aeronautics in charge of a director of naval aviation.
At the present time responsibility for the development of naval aviation is divided between the office of Operations and
This basis of organization does not permit
the numerous bureaus of the Navf Department,
ftdl cooperation with the Army Air Service or with other governments] and civil agencies:
nor does it, in the opinion of the committee: promote the efficient development of aviation
within the Navy.
Fifth. That the Air Mail Service of the Post Offi&Department
be further extended znd
developed.
This service has given the best demonstration of- the practicability of the use of
It has been seriously handicapped by inability to-secure suitable
aircraft for civil purposes.
airplanes adaptid to its work. The ques~ion is one of design, which should be handled by
the industry.
The remecly lies in the development of the industry, which can ordy be brought
about nt an early date by the endorsement ancl prosecution by the Government of a constructive, comprehensive policy.
Sixth. That the Congress approve the program of scientific research in aeronautics formulated by the committee and provide for the enlarged facilities necessary for its prosecution.
Continuous scientific research is necessary for the real advancement of the science of aeronautics. The number and importance of prob~ems requiring solution have increased greatly
-with the general development of aircraft, and the development of airplanes of all-met.al construction will require a large increase in the aerodynamic research and engineering experiment ation conducted by the committee at the I~angley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory at
Langley Field, Va.
- Respectfully submitted,
hTATIoNALADWSORY COMMITTEEroR AERONAUTICS,
CHARLESD. WALCOTT,(?L&mcm.

