L
TECHNICA NOTES.
A
N TIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTIOS.

No •. l? •

ITALIAN AND lillENCB EXRERIMIi.!NTS ON WIND TUNNELS.

By

v\m.

.
Kni gh t, Techn ical. Assi s t · mt in Eur ope ,

Paris Off ice . N. A.C. A.

November, 1920

NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS.
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 17.
ITALIAN AND FR&.'NCH EXPERIMENTS ON WIND TUNNELS.

By
WID. Knight, Technical Assistant in Europe ,
Paris Office, N.A.C.A.

The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics submits the following report, which is the result of a special analysis of the measurements and the investigations of various models of wind tunnels in
Europe, made by Mr. William Knight, now Tecbni~al Assistant in Europe
to the National Advisory C~ittee for Aeronautics. This report was
presented by M Knight in 1918 to Dr. W. F. Dura.tld , then Scientific
r.
Attache to the American Embassy, Paris, France.
Costanzi's Experiments.
The experiments made by Eiffe1 in ~s laboratory at Auteuil in
the aerodynamical tunnel designed by him induced Colonel Costanzi of
the Italian Army to start two seri e s of ex.periments at the 11 Insti tuto
Centrale Aeronautico" at Roms. wi th a view of determining:
1st - What wa.s the influence of the surrounding building
in which the tunnel was installed on the efficiency
of the installation, and
2nd - How the efficiency of the installation was affected
by the design of the tunnel.
The models of tunnels used both in the first and in the second
series of experiments were made out of $ cylindrical chamber connected
at one end to a nozzle and at the other end to a diffuser, t h e sh$pe
and" a!.n:.~nsions being as shown in Fig. 1.
A 24 blade air-screw driven by a 2 HP D.C. electric motor supplied
the air current, the velocity of which was measured in every case in
the cylindrical chamber with a Krell anemometer. A dynamometer inserted in the axis of rotation between the motor and the air-screw me$sutV
ed
the tor~ue absorbed by the propeller for any correspc~ing velocity of
the air current as registered by the anemometer. The speed of the motor
varied between 250 and 3200 R. P. M Colonel Costanzi in "Rendiconti
.

- 2 -

delle esperienz tJ e degli studi eseguiti nello stabilimento di Experienze e Costruzioni Aeronautiche del Genio - Fasc. 3° Vol. II" gives
the velocity of the air in the restricted section of the tunnel in
meters per second for each experiment performed, the speed of the iIID tor
in r.p.m. and the power absorbed by the dynamometer in kilogrammeters.
The results are presented in 21 Tables (one for each sxFeriment performed) and 6 diagrams.
In order to facilitate the canparison of the results obtained, I
have arranged differently the experimental data presented by Colonel
Costanzi . Instead of giving t he work absorbed by t he dynamometer, t h e

=

Pu
n
ra t ~o -r- t wa s calcul ate d1n every case.
Pm
Pu is the energy possessed by the air in the restricted section
of the ~unnel where the velocity is measured.

P ::: Mv
,u

-

2

T

where:

-rr d 2

M:::

x v3 x

4

d"

2g

rrJv'l. 6'
,M--V..,

"

d ::: diameter of tunnel where t he air velocity is measured.
v

= v elocity

of the air in t he section of t he tunnel having a
diameter d.

o : : density of the air at 15° temp_

and 30" barometric pressure -

g ::: acceleration due to gravity_
Pm

is t he technical energy absorbed by the dynamcme ter for proair current of the velocity V in the section ~ of the
tunnel and is expressed in the same uni ts as Pu ~

ducing~an

f?t=

P~

is the efficiency of the installation.

Pm
In Tables I and II are given the values of jOt calculated for the
24 groups of experiments performed by Colonel Costanzi.
In Table I are tabulated the results of t he first series of 11
experiments made for d etermining the influence of the surroundi ng
building on t he mechanical effici ency of an Qerodynamical tunnel open
at both ends. For t he se experimen ts, two models of t'~ls having
the dimensions shown in Fi g . 1 wer e used. The models were m
ade out of
wood polished inside so as to r educe as m
uch as possible the windage
losses, and were inclosed in a model building of t he dimensions given
in Fi g. 1.

- 3 -

Three diffe:t'ent models of b1.uldiogs were used foX' these expet'~" ­
menta and they wer-e all made \vi"!;h the end d.oors and the roof removable, eo as to allow the measurement of the power absc~bed by" the dynamometer for p:J:'oc1ucing a.n air current of a de.;;ired. 'Y"elo~i ty, when the
intake and ol.'l.tlet of the a.ir waG tak5.tlg p.lace ei ther into the c~.osed
atmosphere of the bui1dj.ng or into the open air. A removable diaphragm
could be placed inside of b~lding No. 1 normal to the axis of the
tunnel, all around the restricted section where the air velocity was
measu~ed.
~his dia~hramn when it was in place prevented the Circulation of the air from one aDd to the other inside of the building.
In Table II are gi van the vaJ.ueG of P t for 13 groups of experifor detenrdning the inn usnce of the desi gn of the nozzle
and the diffuser and the location of the air~screw on the efficiency
of the installation. In Fig . 2 ate given the dimenRions of the models
experimented upon in each case.

ments IDCl.de

The conclusion to be drawn from the first series of experiments are:
1. If the roof and the doors of the building are closed, the
values of ,,0 t as obtained under these conditions are about one half
of the corresponding values of ;0 b as obtained with the end doors open
(see experiments Nos. 1 and 4 ).

z. The opening of either the inlet door or the outlet door, the
addi tion of e. diaphragm in the m5.ddle of the ball all arouvd the tunnel, such as to prevent the air from circulating fl'om ~ end to the
other inside of the building, the opening of the roof, and the increase
in size of the building, have no appreciable jnfJuence on the values
of P t' which will be only slightly larger tl:an when the doors are
closed and the roof is in place.
3. The efficiency of a tuonel having the nozzle and the diffuser
made out of parabolic surfaces is about one half the efficiency of a
tunnel of equal dimensions with straight coni~al inlet and outlet, operating under the same conditions.
The conclusions tbat can be drawn from the second series of experiments are:
1. The extension cf tbe diffuser back of the air-screw increases I
the values of P t,
Z.
If the diffuser is entirely taken off, the efficiency of the
installa.tion is practically equal to the efficiency of P t the a.ir-screw.

3. A cylindrical extension of the diffuser right back of the airscrew has the tendency to decrease the value of,.o t
4 . If both the nozzle and the diffuser are connected at the
smaller end to a cylindrical chamber having a diameter double the smallest diameter of the nozzle and the diffuser, the value of ;0 t is
about 40% smaller than if the diameters were the same (see experiments
ZZ and 24).

-

-----

-

---

~~-~

/ --

- 4 5. A slight discontinuity over. t be length of t ee experimental
chamber (cylindrical po~tion of the tunnel ) decreases only slightly
the value of Pt (see eAperiments 23 and 24) .
6. The increase of the r a tio of the di ameters at the outlet and a t
the inlet of the diffuser fl'OOl 1.7 to 4 .2 produces a decrease of P t
of about 60% (see experiments 16 and 21 ) .
Castella?zi's Experiments.
A third series of experiments was performed later on by Li eut.
Castellazzi of the Italian AIroy (see "Rendiconti dell' Istituto Centrale A
eronautico, Anno VII, 191~) for determining the most effici ent
design of a tunnel of the Crocco type. In Fi g . 3 are given the dimensions of six models of tunnels on which sev en series of expe:iments
were performed. Also in t his case I bave calculated the values of P t
for each corresponding velocity of the air in the experimental chamber, 14-3/16" diameter, and t he valuES obtained are t abulated in Table
III.
The conclusions t hat can be drawn from these experiments are:

1.

The extension of the diffuser behind the air-screw produceS
of Pt.

an increase
2.

value of

A decrease in length of the cylindrical chamber increa ses the

Pt-

3. The shape of the section of the ducts for the return of the
air has no a.ppreciable influence on the value of /J t '
4. , A slight interr~tion over the length of the experimental
chamber decreases only slightly t he va.lue of .P t '
5. The opening of the door on nail communica ti ng to the outside
produces a. large drop in the va lue of Pt.
Comparing t he results obtained from Costanzi's experiments and the
r e sults of Castellazzi ' s experiments we may conclude tbat:
1. The effici ency of a tunnel of the Crocco type is larger than
t he effici ency of an Eiffel tunnel of the same dimensions (see Costanzi
No. 21 and Ca stellazzi No.1). The efficiency of t he Eiff el tunnel at
A
uteuil at a maximun wind speed of 104 feet per s econd is ;<> t :::: 1 ~37
and t he power needed is 84. 5 HPj whil e the effici ency of the Crocco tunnel at Rome at a m
axim wind speed of 165 fe e t per second is P t == 2.9
um
and t he power absorbed is 113 HP. At a w
ind spead of 104 f ee t per
second t he Crocco tun.. lel give s ,P == 2.65 and t h e correspondi ng b orse
"
power supplied by t he motor is onl~ 28 HP.
2. A tunnel of the Crocco t ype has the great advantage of making
posSible its installation in a sm
all building, t he d ~ensions of the

- 5 -

building baving no influence at all on the value of ;0 t ' which, in tile
case of an Eiffel tunnel , is greatly influenced by the sides of the
surrounding buildiDg. Another advantage of the Crocco tunnel is to be
found in the possibility of controlling the temperature and the humidityof the air and in the elimination of the disturbing action of the
wind at the entrance of the nozzle and at the outlet of the diffuser.
Model No.4 of castellazzi's experiments was adopted for the installation of the tunnel at the "Istituto Centrale Aeronautico, Roma.~
Another saries ot experiments was started next for determining the
n~ber and the width of blades of the air-screw Which would give the
beet resul ts~ In the final installation of the "leU tuto Centrale"
eigbt propellers, 23-5/S" diameter, were t ested in tunnel No.4. In
Table No. VII are given the values of P t calculated in the same wa.y
as before and the r,p.m. of the dri ving motor for every corresponding
wind velocity in the section 14-1/8" diameter, are aleo given. For the
flnal inetallation, a N.P.L. type of propeller with seventeen blades
was adopted. In Fig. No . 4 are shown the main dimensions of that installation, and in Table No. IV are tabulated the motor horse-power
and the r.p.m. for corresponding velocities of the air in the cylindrical chamber, as obtained from te.st.
The efflciencl of the propeller was calculated b~ measuring the air
pressure right in front and immediately behind the propeller. No details are given in the publication of the test results about the arrang~ent adopted for m$as~iDg exactly these presS~es.
The values
given for the efficiency of the propeller seem to be too large. The
values of P t were calculated aleo in this case and, in addition, the
values ot P b are given in the last. colunn of Table IV. ( Pb =

"ot

Pv ' where

Pv

is the efficiency of the air-screw.)

Eiffelts EXpertments.
Recently another series of experiments was started by Elffel in
his laborator y at Auteuil on 34 models of tunnels of different d~en­
s10ns as shown 1n Fig. 5.
The nozzle of each model was taking the air from the exper~ental
chamber of the Eitfel installation where a depression of 51.5 millimeters of water was produced by starting the air-screw of the large
tunnel. the depreSSion H 51.5 rom. at the nozzle of the model tested
produced a current of air through the model of tunnel where the air
depreSSion h was measured at the cylindrical section. The efficiency of each model P b::: ~ is given in Table V. Knowing h and ~v

=

I have calculated the velOCity

ot

the air in the cylindrical section

01' ~~. model: V;:
V 2ghd where "d H is the ratio of the specific
welght of the w
ater used in the barometer on which h was measured
and the specific weight of the air, and is: d; eoo~ giving V;:

- 6 -

vz

x 9.81 ~
in Table V.

p .

x .051, ::; x 800 ;

the values of V are tabulated.

0

This series of experiments was started by Eiffel in order to find.
out if, by changing the shape of the nozzle or of the diffuser of the
large tunnel at Auteuil, the efficiency of the installation could.
be impr oVed..
The conclusions arrived at by Eiffal are:
1. The largest value of jOb with the models tested has been obtained with a nozzle at 35 0 and a diffuser at 7°, the largest diameter
of both the nozzle and tbe diffuser being 3 times the diameter of the
cylindrical chamber (se~ experiment No. 25, P b :: 5.67).
2.

The largest value of

Pb

' when the largest diametar of both

the nozzle and the diffuser is double the diameter of the

cal chamber, is obtained wi~ a nozzle at either 35 0 or 22
fuser at 7 0 (see experiments 1 and i7 ~ P b = 4.08)~

0

cylindriand a dif-

3. If the largest diameter of the nozzle is 3 times the diameter
of the cylindrical chamber, acd the largest diameter of the diffuser
is twice the d.iameter of the cylindrical Chamber, the lar§Dst value of
jO " b is obtaiDSQ. with a nozzle at 22° and a diffuser at 7 bsse experimant No.5, ;0 b; 4 .48). If the angle of the nozzle is 35 instead
of 22°, the 'talJia3 of P b does not change bg any appreCiable amount
(see experiment No. 24, Pb;: 4.38).

At the miffel laboratory was also rec~tl~ investigated a model of
tunnel to be installed at the works of Sauter-Barle, Paris.
The dimensions of the model tested and the results of the tests
made (experiments 35 to 39) are shown in the picture on top of Table V
(a) and in Table V (a), respectively.
The val1l6 of ;::>
twice the value of

as obtained from these experiments is more than

pt t as obtained in the large Eiffel tunnel at

Auteuil.
I ha.e been present at the test of the final installation at the
Sauter-Harle works of the tunnel designed by Elftel.
Due to a great lim1 tatioll of availa.ble room the Intake and out),e"
t
of the air could not take plaoe into the open atmosphere.
The air circulation is esta.blisbed through a. room right above the
tunnel, and the prevailing conditions are not such as to insure a steady
flow of the air into the experimental chamber of the tunnel.
In spite of aU the unfavorable condi tiona under w
hich the installation was made, the maximun veloci ty attained by the air in the

cylindrical section of the tunnel is 190 feet per second with a 100 liP
A.C. variable speed motor, 360 to 1200 R.P_ ~ , drivir~ a 6 blade airscrew. The value of ,P t corresponding to 100 HP and 190 feet second

- ? -

air velocity is 1.85 which is 35% larger than tn~ value of fJ t as
obtained with the Eiffel installation at Auteuil for a wind speed of
104 feet per second.

LOSSES IN A TUNNEL.
If no losses due to windage or to other causes were to be found
in an aerodynamical tunnel having a diameter D at the entrance of
the nozzle and at the outlet of the diffuser. and a diameter d at
the cylindrical section, we would have:
4

Pb ~

(+)

D

If d = 2 we would have; P =: 16. Canparing this figure with the
b
values of }Jb as obtained from Eiffel experiments, we can appreciate
the magnitude of the losses.
In Fig. 6 are given a few formulae derived by Eiffel for calculating the losses in an a.erodynamical tunnel (see IlNote sur Ie calcul
des coefficients d'utilisation des buses pour souffleries aerodynamiqa~s
systems G Eiffel.") The coefficient of friction of the air on smooth
surfaces; Kb
is calculated according to Fritzsche's formula whiCh I
have expressed ~raphica1ly in Fig. 7.
APplying the formula given to two models tested by Eiffel (experiments 1 and 8) the calculated values of 'pb are: 4.97 and 3.68, respectively, instead of 4.08 and 3.57 as obtained from test.
In order to compare the results obtained by Costanzi to the results
obtained by Eiffel I have calculated ".0 b for the two models Nos. 21
and 24 experimented upon by Costanzi, by applying the Eiffel formula
(see Table VI), and I have calculated the efficiency of the air-screw:

p

v =

.Pt

Pb

for wind speeds in the cylindrical section of the tunnel

between 20 and S2 feet per second.
I have plotted in Fig. 6 the values thus obtained and I have taken
the curve shown in Fig. 6 as being the efficiency curve of the air-screw
used by Costanzi and Castallazzi in all the experiments made.
Wi th the values of P v thus obtained and the values of P t given
in Table II and Table III the values of )Db given in Table IV were calculated and the results plotted in Fig . 8. In the same way, the values
of ~b as obtained directly by Eiffel in his experiments , (see Table V)
were plotted in Fig. 9.

- 8 -

We

see from Fig. 8 that for each model the general tendency is
decreasing slightly a.s the velocity of the a.ir increa.ses.
These results a.re contrary to the results of other experiments made
by Eiffel and to the results obtained by applying the formula given by
Fig. 6, according to which the values of ~b increase slightly as the
velocity of the air increases. Experience has shown tbat the efficiency of large tunnels is larger than the efficiency of the reduced size
mOdels used for experimental purposes.
to have

CeJl

Po

Eiffel suggests that a value

p = 3.25

well deSigned tunnel of large dtwaustons.

can be anticipa.ted for

a.

\\

Wind Veloc//(1in Seer/on 14g"Oio. FtperSec.
EXPERIMENTAL

CONDITIONS

20

26

33

~O

!j3

66

Wind It%r
VelociA /?'P.H.

Air Filter

47J"

In Sec .
79."{)/a.

FI: St?C.

75

82

98

100

"XPfIfII'?EAlTE. .

Fl. per Sec .
Win d V(!!/ oclll jln :imo // Sec t/on of Tun nel in

NAM £

cO
COST ANZI

26

33

38

40

50

.53

(j(j

75

82

98 100 12B

