TECHNICAL NOTES
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTn FOR .AERONAUTICS.

No.lS.

By

w.

.

l

Stieber.

Translated frow

Technische Berichte Vol. III - 5ec.6,
by

Technical Staff. N.A. C.A.

September, 1920.

NATIONAL .ADVISORY COMrYrI'ITEE FOR AERONAUTICS.

TECIDHCJ\.Y.I PeriE

no.

18.

By
W. Stieber.

Translated from
Technische Berjchte, Vol. III, Section 6,

t·y
TECHNICAL STAFF, N.A.C,A.

The Tecenic.al Staff of the National Advisory Committee for Aeron.utica
has translated th8 following paper in view of its importance in connection wi tb the present dA·...·elop;uar..t 0f the def)i.gn. and construction of instruments- for directly meal:mring tbe '1,;°'<1.1..1.8 and thrust of a propeller.

GENERAL

CON8IDERA~IONS .

Following the earl i.er reports '.:loti tled "Preliminary Resul ts of Free
Flight Tests wi th Dym~roometer B'.lQtI and {'ProFeUe).' T"nrust aud Mea.suring
Hu1J,1/ tho PJ.·esent repor '~ wlll give a. descl'~ptiou of the measUl.'ing h\4b actually used.
The instrument takes the place of the propeller hub on the engine
sbQft anci carr~.es tbA p .... opell ex ~.c t·he us'taJ. way. Th8l: e are two pl'j, ncipfij,J. ID('vi ng ps;,.' ~s () f the me8.SU;" U2e hl.lo: one is c :nm.ec ted Wi t·b the engine
shut, the ottler wi th the propelle!". De tween these two parts a.re inserted dynarnume te" d evj. ce s •
For the forces that are to be measured, the dynamometer devices used
are the most con(Tenient, because:

1. There is no lag; when the direGtion of the loac changes there
are no mutual ru.spJ.a.CGmaZlts bet.ween the meas\lring and force-tI ansmi tting
parts.
2. Ha,ve no tl£.tural period of oscUlation.
3 . Can be so b'..riJ. t that the f')rced oscillations (brought about
by the crankshaft and p~oFel19r) ~e damped.

- Z These properties are of the greatest ~portance, because of the higbly
periodical forces of the motor, which, on account of absence of a flywbeel, are transmitted to the bub; and it is those properties that make
the measurements possible.
Description of Device.
Tbe propeller dynamometer device of Professor Bendemann is represented
in Fig. 1. It consists of a closed ended cylinder, wi th a ti.ght but very
light piston £ to which forces Can be transmitted by aid of a piston rod
£. On the cylinder a pivot ed lever ~ is fixed and guided at the two ends,
which are connected with the regul&ting pistons ~ and f .
When the rod is loaded, the pis~ons first go down, the regulating
piston f admits at g the liquid under pressure which flows in till t be
piston ~ is stopped. In this manner the flow is first throttled down by
the r egulating piston f and. finally stopped when the piston bas rea ched
its original position. Tbe pressure under the piston is than (neglecting
piston friction) proportional to the loading of the piston and can be
measured by a manometer connected witb h . The same action takes place
when some liquid is lost by the piston'; not baing completely tight. If
the load on tbe piston decreases, we have at £ a flow of liquid under
pressure backwa~ds under the ~iston (all the pressure indicators work with
volume variations); the piston rises and the regulating piston ~ allows
liquid to flow from i until the original pOSition of the piston is again
reached.
The piston (neglecting o~den changes of the loading) operates through
very small displacements that are fixed by the pOSitions of the regulating pistons and lever ratios. These displacements can practically be reduced to zero. The piston will then keep its wo~king position constant.
If several s~ilar measuring devices are to be used, tben a single regulating system is suffiCient, all the pressure chambers being connected
with one another.
The above stated properties, full damping and absence of natural oscillations. will be attained when the liquid out-flow is eliminat ed,
economy in oil consumption if the oil used conwhich will also give
tains no air. Lubricating oils un~er pressure absorb great quantities
of air; by tests at ZOo C. the foll owing figures have been found:

an

TABLE I.

Pressure
Dissolved air volume
as fraction of the
volume at 1 At.

;

2

3

30: 40

48

5

52
:

6

12

20

Z7

31 At.

55

4

1

56

59

64

69

71%

"",'!o."

'...

..

,

~

.

;

'. )

, ".

- 3 -

These figures show that the oil pressute c~t be obtained Qy aid of
compressed air, but must be generated by a pump and when UDder pressure
must not come into contact with air.

•

The principal parts of the -'dynamcmeter hub, (Figs. 2 atId 3) are the
cone, the bub, the support of the dynamometer devices and the piston.
In addition to the last are the pipes, the recording device, the oil pump,
etc. The cone a is fixed at the end of the motor shaft by aid of a screw
~n the place of-the ordinary propeller hub) and on the cone is fixed a
hub ~ free to move and whi~h carries the propeller. On tbe cone e~ten­
sion are fixed the measuring devic e s. For the purpose of securing symmetry, two measuring devices are used for tbe torque and two for the
thrust; the axes of the thrust measuring devices ~ bei~ parallel to the
propeller axis, and the torque measuring devices ~ being so disposed
that their axes are tangent to a circle perpendicular to the sbaft and
whose center lies on the propeller a.x;is. Tbus they Call directly measure
the torque . The hub !? has two 1ugs ~ terminatiog in front of the torque
measuring devices and whl..zh tl"6Xlsmi t the torque to the rods f..
.The thrust is transmitted through the rod g to the hub, ],.
The connection between the rotating measuring devices and tbe fixed
pressure indicator (as a recording device) is established by the member
g, a kind of long p~ston, which has a close rotating fit in the long cylinder i. In this cylinder, at equal distances, are made as many grooves as
pressure devices used, and in these grooves termiDate tubes that connect
with pressure indicators. These grooves are thus on one side connected
wi th the measuring devices, and on the other side wi th the pressure indicators, so that the oil pressure is transmitted by the grooves fran the
one to the other. As this arra7.lgement dem&llds a free shaft end, i t is
fixed in front of the measuring devices.
As for the actual dynamometer hub, .Figs. 4 to 7 show that for different motors the cone must correspond to the shaft end, and the hub to the
propeller; those parts of the cone that support the measuring devices are
buil t in such a way as to be removable and are conne cted wi th each other
by a special tooth clutch. The measuring devices are the most expensive
parts of the dynamometer hub, on account of the close-fitting parts, measuring pistons, regulating deVices, etc. Because of the removable cone,
the use of the bub is greatly extended and the work of fitting to different engines rendered easier, which largely offsets the price and weight
of the additional clutch device.
The cone e. on account of the stress to which it is subjected, and
in order that it may have a reasonable size, is made of nickel steel.
It is hardened, and, on its cylindrical and conical part, ground. The
largest part of the cylindrical surface receives the hub and is provided
with lubricating grooves. On the front is disposed the clutcb device,
and in a recess is placed the hub screw ~ as well as the pulling ring.
The hub is accurately adjusted on the cone, and, on account of its
outside form being irregular, is made of cast steel (see Fig. 8). The dimenSions of the hub are fixed by the length and: diameter of the central

- 4 -

hole in the propeller boss, and the position and size of tbe propeller
hub itself. The diameter of the cylindrical part is limited by the si~e
of the cone. The bearing surface is as usual., lined with whi te metal.
In the piece ~) for the transmission of the torque. special pieces
made out of tampered tool steel are pressed in the holes i. forming
seats in which are pivoted silver steel rods or tappets.

~

The motion between hub and cone is limited in both opposite senses
for each force direction; in the sense of the axis by teeth! cast together with the piece ~, which act as a stop to the cone (see Fig. 5);
in the rotational direction by two stops m, fixed to the seats n of the
measuring device. To render easier the exact adjustment of the dynamometer hub speCial muks 81 on the rim and 82 on the lugs Q are provided.
The form of the supports of the measuring devices is fixed by the
and position of torque pistons. The last must not only be opposite
the stops but must also be so disposed that the centrifugal force on the
pistons and on the oil does not affect the measurements.
aiz~

If, for example, a piston with flat bottom, of radiUS ~ and area ~
rotates around the Q axis (Fig. 9) with an angular velocity, and is
under the influence of a liqUid colUDll of densi ty
f tbat reaches the

axis, tben

a force

= c.F.

P

piston when c =

+
~ 2
is acting on the
and ~ and £ have the signification

+

&2

f

2

b2

2g

shown in Fig. 9. If the piston bottom has an exca.va.tion. of volune 1..
whose center of mass Sv is at the distance ~ from the piston bottom, then:
p:;

c.

F (a2

wbere

+

!

=

F

b l2 )

r

2

+

and b'

=b

2

+

V (2 s - u)

- u.

Both formulae show that the force P depends upon b or b', that is, upon
the position of the piston in the cYlinder.
In the center of mass ~ of the piston of weight G • there acts in
k
the sense of the piston axis an additional forca Zd, which is a part of
the centrifugal force Z of the piston
d=~.

2

_

(b - e)

g

where 51 and ~ have the meanings shown in Fig. 9. These two disturbing
forces act in opposite senses. If we put P equal to 'Zd' we can then find
a value for b such that the two disturbing forces will balance one another, and in this way the influence of the centrifugal force will be
eliminated. In order to make the force f as small ~ pOSSible, the open
ends of the cylinders of the measuring devices are closed by covers 0
(see Figs. 5, 6, 10 to 12) and behied the piaton filled with oil that

'.,

.'

~

t .' . •

~" .. , -

', I'

~:~,-"""",'C" " '",:,,_. . -~------------------~--~
,
. ~

- 5 -

reaches tbe axis througb boles~, In order that tbe stops and piston can
act ~n one another. the oovers have special devices just in front of the
stops. The baj.a:oc~'J.g ~f the forces P and Zd thus has to be made only for
tbe vol une change p:;;od l.lced by the movement of the cover s and the '~bj cmasa
of the piston he.M. The covers prote.ct the cylinder from dtrt and sand.
The pi9t('.n~ ar.e IDE.de of hardened steel. and are as light a$ possH/le.
The regulaying pistons of the torque measuring devjces are connected direcUy to the phtou bY' threa<ied ringe. As the meZl.s1);:;"in;:; devi ces are not
provided wi tb out-flow regulation, a regulating leyer is tmnecessary.
The tbrust measu:dng devices (Fig. 5) have also the b~('.k of. the~ r
cylinders cloilwi wl'~h cC'vers , and the space t·hus formed filled wlth 1)1l.
It is to be nr:teri tbat thei;'(' regula.ting pistons do not get. 1;he P C6S31U' S
0:1.1 tbro"llgh the preSS1.~e oj 1 manifold, but through the hoJ,G E., (Frg . 6),
from the p)~e ssW:0 v0J:~1'.Xl e .' .imiting the torque measuring device:>; bcA;h types
of measurir,g de:rll". ces are th"ns conne cted wi th one another. wbi. ch is made
poss]. ble on acC" ?'.m. ~ ()f tho fa.e t toot the pressure to be meap-ured i 9 less
in the th:;:-ust meaaru.'ing dev·:i.ce6 than in the torque measuring dev:i.ces_
The disposition of the measur~Dg devices nscessitates the complicated
form of their s"\),rPQrts, which thus have to be cast. They cou.l.d not be
made out of brass , on account of the need for economy- in bra.ss dUl'lng the
war, and the <ii:"flcu.1ty of ca.sting steel brought us to a.dopt cast iron.
The supports of the meaa\U~ing devices ha.ve inside a spec;.al ring body,
disposed behi~Jd the clutcbi..ng tee ·~h. and have in front a spa~e for the
rotat:i..!lg p:ress'.ll·e co:mect j ':)0. en this r:!.lJg bo~.y al"e fix.ed the cylinders
for the memont mea~U?ing devices. The moet h ighly stressed 8~ction of the
measur:i.ng device has a T form so disposed that the highest stress is a
compression.
The pieces m also serve as abutments for .the hub stope B on the cylinders of tbe torgue measu~ing devices . These pieces act When the torque
is negative or the dynamomete~ bub is closed. The pipes are connected as
follows:
tl 1 s the preSSl!I'e oil pips,
t z and t3 are ccnne cted \71. th the measuring pipes,
t.4 and ts conne ct the to:rq'l.e measuring devices. and.
t6 and t7 connect the thrust measuriug devices.
The measuring devi0es are atta~hed to the cone piece by the cylinder
unit, whi.ch hao an inteb'l1a.l flange ~ through which the sten of the hub
screw y pa.sses and i.s fixed to the hu.b SCi~ew s. The head, which is mainta.ined fixed by the ring ~. is adjusted close-to the flange and ensures
the support of the meaem'lng dev:i.ca~, and also transmits tb.e propeller
thrust. The threa d of the hub screw is always ~f finer pitch than that
of the motor shaft.
The body of the rotating pressure connection is mada of phosphor bronze,
and is fastened by a flange and ring scre~ to the cylinder body of the
measu~ing devices .
There is then enclosed a space which is filled with oil.
The body has three grooves, from which ta, t9' and tlO leWi to the connec-

- 6 -

tion tubes t l , t 2 , and t on tbe cylinder unit of tbe measuring devices.
Tbe stationary member is3made of tool steel, and has four passages, one of
which runs the entire length. At the head of this member are fixed four
3-millimeter brass tubes, ohe of wbich brings the pressure oil, two others
tl'ansmi t tbe torque and thrust, and tl;le fOUl'th tube, connected witb the
through passage leads the oil inside the support of the measuring ,·devices I
and thence behinO. the pistons of the measuring devices and between the
cone and the hub.
At the head of the pressure connection there is a secW'5.ty device
which prevents, when fully assembled, any part of the c,yrw.mometer hub from
being deranged, or the propeller fram touching anything. For this purpose the copper tubes are disposed in a special casing, supported by ball
bearings and guided along a rod to which the casing is fixed. Between
this rod and the casing a special wire is stretched, which will be broken
by a load of 70 to 80 kg., but which under ordinary conditions will more
than sustain the friction moment at the bearing. As soon as the friction
moment exceeds a certain quantity, the wires . break, the copper tubes are
twisted apart in the casing, and the casing is left free to rotate on its
ball bearings.
As the pressure connection is a new mechanical detail, it has been
tested under working conditions for friction, security, pressure transmission and tightness. The friction moment varies from 0.10 to 0.25 kg.-m.
The pressure transmission is perfect, and the oil 10s8 by lack of complete
tightness was ordinarily 25 c.c. per hour, with oil of 40 degrees viscosity.
The total oil consumption of the dynamometer hub was found to be
Thrust meters
Torque me ters
Indicator
~ressure connection
Manifold
Total

SO c. c.
100
10
50
30

"

"
"
"

.vrtr

!:lC".:.t'

II

11

"
"
"

"

"

"

250

From the pressure ccnnection rod ' the tubes' are brought to the observers
pla.ce. The parts necessary for th;l.a purpose are different for different
motors and airplanes. In general the tubes are inclosed in a case made of
tubing wi th thin walls, and lead. Oy'er the propeller to the motor and then
to the observer (see Fig. 13). The additional devices, such as the pump,
pressure tank, oil tank, oil divider, recording device, and indicator are
disposed on a small special table (Fig. 14), which can easily be placed
in the fuselage.
Tests with the Dynamometer Hub.
The dynamometer hub was first tried on a propeller testing stand which
is operated by an electric motor and suspended on a pendulum frame. The
pendulum frame has a friction of about 0.5 kg.-m., which for small powers
is r elatively high. But for greater powers this friction, because of the
greater vibration for higher revolutions, is both relatively and abs olutely
decreased, and in the range of torques from 60 to 80 kg.-m. is so small

- ? -

that in ordinary 1;:0OOi tions it bas no appreciable influence. The torque of
the electric motor is controlled by varying the magnetic field. As the
balanced frame oscillates nearly all the time a sensitive adjustment is
obtained.
For the thrust measurements the largest error waS ! 5 kg.
For
the ca.libration of the dynamcmeter hub the torque wa.s by steps of 10 kg.-m.
increased from 30 kg.-m. to 80 kg.-m., the revolutions of tbe motor being
adjusted in proportion y and starting from 50 kg.-m. the thrust was measured, because for smaller torques the error is too grea.t. The diagrams
of this calibration (Fig. 15) are mutually displaced 34.5 mID. because of
the recording arrangement . In order not to increase unnecessarily the
length of the diagram, the recording was stopped during the adjustments.
The figures Oll the diagram and in Table II correspond to each other.
The mean error is 0.5% for the torque and 1.3% for the thrust. As in the
dynamometer hub there are no reasons for a less accurate measurement of
the thrust than of the torque, the greater error in thrust measurement
must be attributed to a less sensitive weasuring of the thrust of the
propeller stand. The error in the torque measurement ought also to be
less; but this error extends through the propeller stand, dynamometer hub,
and recording device.

.
- 8 TABLE II.
Ca libr a tion of the Dynamome t e r Hub .

Nov. 11, 1917'. - At 13° C. an d 765 mm.
E1ec'tt'i c a1 Te st ,
Dyna mometer hub di agr a m.
No. :R. P" ~ ,. ~ Tor qu e : Thrus t: Tor qu e
spring s ca l e 3 m
m'=3. 9 kg . : Thru s t :sp ring s c a l e 4 mm .= 25 .2 kg .
:Di agr am:
:Diagr am :
Tnrust
Torque
Error
: Error
he i ght:
he i ght:
%
~
.

1

1
2

~

~

7

8

9

10

11
12

85 1
972
1085
1181
12 5"4132
131 9
1252
1176 ~
108 3
94 1 :
860 :

~g
50
60
70
80
30
70
60

~g
30

175
225
285
335
~8 0
'05
40 5
380
33 0
280
23 0
175

23
31

~8 .5

5·5
53 · 5
60.5
60.5
~3.5

5·5
38
31
25 .5

~g .5

50.5
60
70 · 5
so
80
70·5
60

~g.5
30

+0
+1. 25
+1
+0
+ 0.7
+0
+0
1- o. 7,
.... 0

+0
+ 1. 25
+0

45

~i

65.5
65 . 5
60.5

~~ . 5

28433 4
~84
13
41 3
381
340
286

-0.35
-0.29
+1
+1. 9
+1. 9
+0.26
+3·0
+2

- 9 -

testin g
Afterw ards the dynamometer hub was put on an aviat ion motorfor a calnot very conve nient
stand with a pendulum frame . The last is
ion motor under
ibrati on, but the dynamometer hub had to work on an aviat
spite of the great er stress ing
the same condi tions as on an airpla ne. In
as on the
of the diffe rent parts , the dynamometer hub worked as well
ete diagra m. The motor
elect ric .tasti ng stand . Fig. 16 gives a compl
ation s which
ga.ve a torqu e of 80 kg.-m . The thrus t recor d shows fluctu
tests were made in the open air
are to be attrib uted to the fact that the
the wind and
and in the neigh borho od of other testin g stand s, so that
ller. At ~ and Q the recor ding
artif icial air curre nts acted on the prope
nnect ed and
devic es, by aid of their three- way cocks , were sudde nly disco
ent fluctu ation from zero
conne cted again , which produ ced the sudde n appar
slowl y throt to full ~oad. At ~ the motor was quick ly throt tled, at ~ ia of the pro~
follow . The inert
tled. At ~ quick varia tions of the load
pelle r appea rs very clear ly under this condi tion.
it was ·
After the ciynamOllleter hub had worked here wi thout troub le,
was taken
place d on an airpla ne and obser ved in fligh t. Speci al caredispo sition of
. as a conse quenc e of the
that no new vibra tions could occur
the hub.
Testin g Resu lts.
the aviaThe great est stress ing of the dynamometer hub occur red oninflue nce
did not
tion motor stand . Large vibra tions took place , which
ctions bethe measu remen ts but so stron gly vibra ted the manif old conne
measu ring devic es
tween the press ure, conne ction and the suppo rts of the
after from
and betwe en the measu ring devic es thems elves, that they broke stron ger,
nt made
20 to 60 minut es of work. The tubes were on this accou
and were conne cted
in order to reduc e their perio d of natur al vibra tion,
and hub piece s
with each other and attach ed more stron gly. The cone
d sligh tly. The
worked witho ut diffic ulty. The press ure conne ction heate
ction was 'too close safety devic e opera ted once becau se the pressu we conne
ction parts ,
ly adjus ted, but preve nted any break ing damage to the conne
hand. Since
so that it was possi ble to disass emble the conne ction ~y
e be~ng put
then each conne ction was tested for torqu e resist ance, befor
in use.
the thrus t
For sudde n chang es of the load, the diagra m showed that
as the torqu e.
· stays behin d the torque and does not incre ase .s rapid ly
for the accel This is a resul t of the inert ia of the prope ller and hub,
yed. For study eratio n of Which a part of the motor power has to be emplo time that
ing the shape of the diagra m we must take into accou nt the
new stead y conelaps es, after a distur bance of stead y condi tions, until
ition time Tu
dition s are reach ed. For the deter minat ion of this trans
s, that is, of
we need to know the moment of inert ia of the rotat ing masse
betwe en hub and
the prope ller and the hub, becau se the torqu e is measu red 160 H.P. hub
a
cone. By the well known pendulUIl method it was found for t of inert ia of
As the momen
and "Eta" prope ller J = 0.49 kg. -In. sec. Z.
parts inclu ding part of the conne cting rods, 1s
the rotat ing motor
inert ia of the
aroun d 0.008 kg.-m . sec. , that is 1.5~ of the moment of
s with thick
prope ller, the follow ing calcu lation may also hold for motor
hubs.

z

- 10 -

For an air propeller we can with sufficient accuracy put Ml = m .
where M is the torque at the angular velocity (Vl and m the torque as
determi~ed by experiment for angular velocity equal to unity. If tbe
torque increases to
with corresponding increase of angular velocity
to w 21 then,.. a.s we pass from W l to W Z ' for any ~ntermediate value
GJ alld a corr$)ponding torque M the surplus torque 16 equal to

6)2

MZ)

Mu ::; M - M ::; m . ( W 2
Z

z _ / . \z)
\..A.I

The angular acceleration at that moment is eq1.JaJ. to

Mu ::; m
_.

d W ;:: _

dt

J

J

W2)

(W 2 2. -

From this, by integration between the limits 601 and
transi tion time,
W Z
T

u-

+w]

J

_

Z

W'Z we obtain the

m•Wz

Wz-W

WIZ

WI

as a. logari thmic function that for W 12. :;:. ,yW2 : .gives Tu ::; 00
To a.ssist in evaluating this equation, 1t is usual to intrQduce the degree

W2 - W'Z

, that in no Case needs to be less than
of steadiness £ =
(J 2
the degree of irregularity of the motor. Afterwards introduc~ . <5 =
W 2 -6.>.I.
as the relative variation of the angular velocity or r.p.m.

W2
we get

o

€
For

(' = 0.005 and
[

::;

)

)

= 0.001 we obtain the following values

C

::: 0.001 ,

0.10, 0.50, 1.00,

0

:::

0 .05, 0.10, 0.50, 1,00 ,

0.9, 1.2, 2.0, 2.5 sec.

Tu

;:::

1.6, 1.9, 2.7, 3.2 sec.

::: 0.005,

0 = 0.05,
Tu

€

(2 - (
(2 - 6

0::; 1 corresponds to the time of the start. € ::: 0.005 represents
the approximate degree of irregularity of an aViation motor. A reduction
of this value to 1/5 increases Tu by approximately 0.7 sec., and conversely. An exact knowledge of these values, which, express the degree of
irregularity of the motor, is thus seen to be unnecessary. The values of
Tu ranging from 1 to 3 seconds, explain the retardation of the thrust relative to the torque; because where torque variations occur in less time
than Tu' the full thrust corresponding to the angular velocity cannot be
reached.

1

- 11 -

Free Flight Tests.
Following the above described preliminary tests, the first ~~eter
hub was tried on a Runpler C-2 airplane. Fig. 14 shows the general arrangement, with the exception that a recording device with a paper speed
of 10 mrJJ../sec. and two imicators with a mutual displacement of 34.5 z;m.
and recording height of 30 mm. Were used.
The first flight took place November 7, 1916, in clear calm weather,
and was of 15 minutes' duration, a height of 800 m. belng reached.
Fig. 17 represents this best without the scale reducing that took place
while calibrating. During the test the indicator traced the torque line
rather thiCk, because it reproduced to some extent the tor~ue shocks of
the motor. Before the flight, (a), a trial was made at 1000 r.p.m. and
also at full load. ThereuPQn the motor was throttled and the dynamoIIleter
hub locked; the torque record rose to the highest limit of the indica~or.
At the moment of the start of the flight (b) the device was freed and
the two indicators began to record. The torque rose, and having reached
its high val1l6, kept i t~ The thrust first rose, but immediately dropped
with the increase of speed of the airplane. With increase of altitude
both quantities dropped. The stopping of the motor for a glide (c)
b;t",.,ougbt a sudden drop of both quantities. Close to the ground the throtUe
was once mQre opened and the motor allowed. to run. This is clearly shown
in the diagram. Fig. 18 represents a flight made April 3, 1917, in gusty
weather. The air speed is here recorded as a third quantity, by aid of
a pressure plate.. The diagram shows the influence of the different gusts
on the thrust. It may be seen how important it is to record the air
speed at the sawe time.
SUIlDlary. The construction. of the dynamometer hub is illustra.ted and
and its electrical and aviation motor tests, as well a.s those
in free flight, described •
~1ained,

•

. Hoff. New Forces, Measuring DeVices, and Determination of the Forces
in the Wires in Flight, Zeltschrift fur Flugtecbnik und Ja.b.rgang 1914,
pp. Z1 and 149.
Motorluftschiffa.b.rt

