Report No.8

GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS
COVERING

REQUIREMENTS OF AERONAUTIC
INSTRUlVIENTS
2
11
4e

NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
for AERONAUTICS

Reproduced by

NATIONAL TECHNICAL
INFORMATION SERVICE
U 5 Deportment of Commerce
Springf ield VA 22151

.

REPORT

NO.

8.

GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS COVERING REQUIREMENTS OF AERONAUTIC INSTRUMENTS.

BY The NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOR AEBONAUTIC9.

..— —
23

REPORT No. 8.
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS COVERING ItEQUIREhfENTS
OF AERONAUTIC INSTRUMENTS.
By me

~ATI02TAL

&WIHOEY

oomdrrrEE

FOB h1301tA=08.

.,, . ..

.

. . . ...

.

INTRODUCTION.

For the information of those -yoncernedwith the use or ~mducfion
of instruments used in the na ation ad opamtion of amraftl the
follo~
genersI list and sp3 . cations have been prepa~dwtim~
view to udicating the Iinea on which developnwnt is
T
the restrictions and diflicultk to be overcome in the eeign’ and
construction of aeronautical instruments:
Barometeror altimeter.
km=
meter.
Inclinometer.
Drift meter.
Tachometer.
oil gauge.
oilpe&mra
gauge.
Gadine
uge.
Oaealinerow indicdor.
Distanceindicator.
Barogra h.
F
2%%r$&~mEi%icator.
i
&?OI&e feed eyetem presalrendicator.
AirpIarL;director.

GENERAL REQUIEEMEINl!S.
All indicating insbumfds re uired h the navigation of airuaft
should be as com act, ruggd, an1 .U t a9is cunsiaknt with accuracy,
rdiability and t?
urability, end wiF ease of reading. Su+ iDstrumats must be free from the influence of the following chsturbii
effeots, except@, of course, those effects on vihich they depend for
their operatio~ viz, vibration, change of altitude and okmge of temperature.
BAROWITER

OR ALTIMETER

Baromet-eIs or sltimetm must be sensitive and of open scale, and
the lag in their operation should be the absolute minimum obtainable.
‘When operating in a fog it is essential that the distam% above the
surface should be Imown within very close limits. Such instruments, of cmrse, are dependent on barometric pressure and OR VMitL25

.—

.

26

AERONAUTICS.

tions of barometri~ pressure from the time of the start of a “ ht
until the completion of a fli ht, which can not be provided for, ut
%
aside from this error their inf icatione ahouId be substantially accurate
onm they are adjusted at the oint of de arture. It is, therefore,
necessary that the ecale ehouId % e of equ a? divisions, as otherwise a
change of zero to meet change of barometric height will introduce an
error. Their location on the airplane must be carefuII~ chosen so
that their indications will not be mtlmnced by the veloc~ty pressures
in flight.

COMPASS.
Compasses should have as high a directive force as is consistent
with restricted dimensions, Provision should also be made in the
compass mountiug for compensating for the pr~ence of magnetic
material in the cons~c~lon of the airphme, partmularly co~pemation for heeling and dl w errors,.. In order that the dmctwe force
shall not be abnorm H y reduced b such compensation it is, of
tours?, desirable that the structures i ould avoid the use of magnetio
matermls in moving parfs near the compass location, such as the
control columns, shafts, and leads.
AIR SPEED METER
An air speed meter shouId indicati reliably the speed through the
air, and should be free from the efTectsof acoeleratlons, as when the
machine is banking strongl in a tu~ the ed?ect of gravitation is
augmentid by the presence of the centrrfugsl force. As the sustaining
power of an airplane is dependent upon the d~ity
of the atmosphere, it is comdered thqt air ~ eed meters which are dependant on
the pressure due to veloclty wd be a safer form of indicator than a
true ~nemom@43rtype.
It ISessential that the indicators shall be particularly sensitive and
have an open scale reading at velocities approaching a stalling speed,
which is the lower limit of safe flying speed. It m also necessary
that they should indicatn high s eeds accurately, in order that
excessive speed may be avoided w1 pn g$.iding. Excessive speed in
liding in?olv?s dang~ when a machme ISbroumght p }00 sharply, as
u
% e combination of h~h s eed and the maxmmm hft factor may
readily stress the machme %eyond safe Iimite. Also, when flying at
high speed the angles @ attack ar? small, and there is dan er of the
airplane ent+ng a cmtmsl condition in which the flow o F air may
develop radmal chan~es of sta~, and consequently rest than es iu
the lifting power avadable. AU speed meters shouf d be capa% of
le
calibration immediatdy prior to a @ht.
Air speed meters of the
Pitot type dependent on a fluid are subject to gravitational errors
when banking. The are also subject to error due to heeling or
diving. Unless the L ads from the Pitot tube to the indicating
instruments are sticiently large, there is also danger of a serious lag
in indications.

INCLINOMETER.
Inclinometers of the pendulum or spiritAeveI
e are inaccurate
P
in the resen~ of accelerations and are oil usefu as a general check
as to & e attitude. of ,the machine when J ying in a fog. It is v
7
desirable that an md~cator free from these defects should be deve -

AI?JWNAUTICS.

oped.
p.~ses

~htmg

27

~scopiq base line is considered desirable not only for
in+ination but es &@ing
a base line for
and for the use of instruments of nawgation.

A

T
o

udicatng

DRD?I’ MEl!lX&

of two t es-one designed forthepurpose of indi2 ace for u9e in connection with na ‘Uation,
~!!%&%%rO~%;~;perly
termed “side slip indicator’bor
the
purpose of indicating whet+er qr nqt the machine is flyin square to
the. wind. we latter dwation
E ccmsudered~referab f e for imlicatmg the ~ttdmde of the machine. For n~~atmg over the ground
the course H readi~y determine
of objects on @e surface, and the same metho IS av
‘bym”Y+ea%?rL31:z
gating over the water provided there is a definite object on which to
sight. One type of &t meter indicates by the streaking of waves
across the ob]eotive ghs of the instrument as a yarent drift, but. as
the particles of the waves thamsehs which in& cate this stre
have a velocity of their own, such indications are subject to error.
9
the surface wmd direction or velocity were Imown correction might
be made but when flying at an altitude of sev end thousand feet it
is very &sly that the airplane itself maybe in an entirely difierent
current of au than that present at the surface. k addition to this,
tidal currents may also affect the velocity of the watar particks.
Two forma of side slip indicators ~t,
the simplest form being that
of the well-known string or pennant, but the latter can not be used
satisfactorily in the wake of a tractor ro aller. The other type consists of a very sensitive pendulum wW“ indicates whether or not
lateral accelerations are resent as WU be the case for a machine
which is not properly b &nmed ~aterall~, but such an instrument is
subject to the defect that if the machme is side slipping laterally
at a constants eed, lateral acceleration is no longer present. It can
only be depd ed on to indicate initial disturbances.
Drift meters are

‘I!ACHOMEI’FE.

Tachometers should be absolute in their indications, and if &
trical should not be subject to disturbanin the conductivity of
circuits from any cause, or to deterioration of magnetism of a permanent magnet.
OIL GAUGE

Oil .gaugea must definitely indicate the amount of oil present in
the crank ease.
OIL-PFUZSSUEE GAUGE

OiI-pressure gauges must accurately indicate the pr-ure
in the
oil system and should elm rndicate that the flow of oiI is undisturb&d.
GASOLINE GAUGE

Gasoline gau es ahouId indicate the amount of
in the main tar% and should not depend on the
line in a glass tube, as, due to the transparency
tank and an empty tank would give the same
chanical indicators are considered preferable.

gasoline available
visibili . of gamOf gaso e,,a full
%
imhcations. bf’e-

9

28

AERONAUTICS.
GASOLINE-FLOW

INDICATOIL

(baoline-flow
indicatim
should de~d
on mechanical
means of
indicating that the gasohne is being supplied from the main tanb
to the service tanks.
DISTANCE INDICATOR
.

ation at sea or over unknown country it is de&able that
T distance .flovm through tha air sho~d be available. If
a ~~
o
it were not for the fact that the slip of the propeIler depends
Iargely on the Ioad of the machine, and whether or not the machim
is dmb~
or gliding, an engine counter would serve thie purpose, but lt is considered prefaable to have a cmmter or recorder
actuated by an anemometer for this purpose. In either case, actual
distanca over the surface wiH require cmrection for the wind velocity
and direction.
BAROGRAFM

Barographs are subject b
altimeters.

the came general spctications

m

ANGLE OF A’M!ACK INDICATOR

le of attack indicator ehouId be dead beat, free from the
vitation, and accurately respond to and indicak an
e@5ti Yo
than e of r e direction of flow o! a$ to. the supporting surface9. ? t
ed and its mdmations should be-clearly bgible
shoJ d be light r
to the pilot. ft ?oulh be designed for attachment in advance of
the wings on a tractor biplane and clear of the iniluence of the
propeller or the body.
RADIATOR

TEMPERATURE

INDICATOR

A radiator temperature indicatorshouId be readily inserted in the
top of the radiator and should clearly indicate the beat operating
temperatures. The thermometer +ould conform tQ best practice,
and the entire instrument be m.f&mmtly rugged to wltihstand reaeonable vibration and shock.
GASOLINE FEED SYSTEM PRESSURE INDICATOIL
Where the gasoline feed is not gravitational, the indications of
the pressure.available must be accurate. The gasoline feed system
pressure inchcator must not be affected by vibration or change of
temperature. It must have a good scale end a dead-beat action.

SEXTANT.
Sextants should be as light and small as possible commensurate
with proper accuracy, A sextant for measuring the altitude of a
heaverdy body above a horizontal lane without the use of the sea
horizon or an artificial horizon wo u?d be most des.irable.
DIREC1’tM&
AIRPLANE

“An airplane director-for the mechanical solution of the coume and
distance made good, based on the course and speed of the aeroplane
and the form and direction of the wind, is a desirable development.

