-...

REPORT No. 15
:

NOMENCLATURE FOR .AERONAUTICS

ByTIIO
NATIONAL.D-RY 00MMi3TEE
A
FOEAEEZONAU’IYCS
.
,

1s9

REPORT No. 15.
NOMENCLATURE FOE AERONAUTICS.
By theNATIOmL kmsmm

Coxmrrm

FOR

hE0NAUTIC9.

—

IN’J!RODUCTTON.
For the information of those interested in aeronautics the foUowing nomenclature has been prepared as a guide, with a view to eliminate the duplication of terms, the erroneous use of terms, and confusion of terms, and to detlne the principal terms which have come
into use in the dedo
ment of aeronautics. Iii the preparation of
this nomenclature o J’ y those terms have been defined which are
peculiar to this subject.

—

AERONAUTICAL OMENCLATURE.
N
&moFom: A winglike structure, flat or curved, designed to obtain reaction upon its surfacea from the air through which it
moves.
AmuwL4NE: See Air@ane.
&LERON: A movable auxiliary surface used to produce a rolling
moment about the fore-and-d axis.
AmORAJKC:
Any form of craft designed for the navigation of the air—
airplanes, balloons, diriggilk, helimptem, kites, kite baUoonsl
ornithopters gliders, $to.
AIRPLANE:A ~orm of amraft heavier th.~.air whioh has wing sursurfaces, rudders for
faces for sup rt in the air, with stab
ough the air. This
steerina an CP
power plant for propulsion
%
term is commozdy used in a more restricted sense to refer to airIanes fitted with landing gear suited to operation from the land.
b the Ianding ~ear is suited to o qr+;~ from the water, the
term “seaplane’ is used. (See d E&I
Pu.s7@.-A type of airplane with the p~peUer in the rear of the
T’%.~A
type of airplane with the propeller in front of the
-e”
mmm:
An instrument designed to measure the speed
fiIB-SPEED
of an aircraft with reference to the air.
Am-:
k aneroid mounted orr an airmaft to indioate continuously its height above the surface of the earth.
AxidJIxr3m:
by
instrument for meumring the wdocity of the
la

—

—

—

.—

—

—
—

142

REPOET
NATIONAL DVTSOBY
A
COM3UZTEEORAIMONAU!CICK
F

ANGLE
:
Of atta.d OP incidence of an aerqfd.-l’he
of
acute angle between
the direction of the relative wind and the chord of an aerofoil;
i. e., the an le between the chord of an aerofoil and ita motion
relative to & e air. (!l?hk detition may be extended to any
body having an axis.)
GMcaZ.—The angle of attack at which the lift-curve has ite &t
maximum; sometimes referred to as the ‘i burble
int.” (If
fie “ ~t c~e”
has more than one mklmlm> J& refers to
“
the first one.)
Qiiding.-The .a@e the “ ht ath makes with the horizontal
when %ymg m SM au un er ~ e influence of gravity alone, i. e.,
9{
without power from the engine.
Ammmx: The hose at the bottom of a baUoon used for inilation.
In the case of a spherical balloon it aIso serves for equalization of
&!#%%Tw&TIO: The ratio of span to chord of an aerofo.d.
AvxroR: me operator or ilot of heatier-than-air+raft.
This term
is apptied regardless of tf e sex of the operator.
AXES.OF AN AIRCIRAFKTluw tied lines of reference; usually centrcudal and rnutually.rectan
‘he principal lon@dinfi P ax.L in the @ane ofs
illy parallel to the axis of the propeller, M called t? e fo~emddma~~
am.s (or longitudinal axk); the axis perpendicular to this in the
plane of symmetry ia called the vertical axis; and the third axis,
rpendicuhw to the other two, is called the transverse axis (or
~teral axis). In mathematical discussions the first of these axes,
drawn from front to rear, is called the X axis; the second, drawn
upward, the Z axis; and the third, forming a ‘~hft-handed” system, the ~ axis.
BALANCING FLAPS:See Mknim.
BALLONET: A small balloon within the intwior of a balloon or diri“ble for the purpose of controlling the rwcent or deeccnt, and
ror maiutatin
prwsure on the outer envelo e so as to prevent
deformation. !& e ballonet is ke t inflated witE air at the required
pressure, under the contiol of a f lower and valves.
BALLCWN: form of aircraft compris” a gss bag and a basket. The
A
support in the air resulte from the uoyancy of the air displaced
Y
b the gas bag, th? fo~ ;&h&
is maintained by the pressure
or a contained gas
Banwge.-A sma spherical ca&ve balloon, raised as a protecY
tion. against attacks by airplanes. --~
Oaptive.-A balloon restrained from free flight by means of a
cable attaching it to the esrth.
.ZZite.-An elongated form of ca tive balloon, fitted with tail
append es to keep it head J’ into the wind, and deriving
T
increase lift due to ita axis being inclined to the wind.
PiZ&=eA&mdd spherixd balIoon saut up to show the direction
&Mmiing.-A” small spherical balloon sent aloft, without passengers, but with registering metaorolo “cal inatrumente.
BALLOON
BED: A mooring place on the groun f for a captive balloon.
BAgeO~em:
The cloth, usually cotton, of which balloon f abrics
.

REPORT NATIONAL ADVISOEYCOMMITTEE FOR AEBONAUTtCFx 143
BWON FABBICI:he finished material, usuaUy rubberized, of which
T
balloon envelopes sze.made.
lane laterally-i. e., to rolI it about the
BANK: To incline au
fore and aft axis. Rig t bank is to incline the airplane with the
T
right wing down. Also used as. a noun to dwcribe the position of
is iIIChMd to the horizontal.
an airpkme when it9 lateral
to record vsriatione in barometric
BAROGWH: & instrument s
pressure. In aeronautics the&aria on tvhich the records me made
indicate altitudes directl instead of barometric pressures.
BASKET:The car suspn J ed beneailh a balloon, for passengem,
balIast, etc.
BmmNE: A form of airplane in which the main support&m surface
is divided into two parts, one above the other.
BODY OF LY mWLANE: The structure which contains the power
pIant, fueI, pass~gers etc.
BO.NNET:The applmrme,!having the form of a parasol, which protects
the valve of a spherical balloon sgaimt rainBBIDLE: The system of attachment of cable to a balloon, including
lines to the sue ension band.
BURBLEFonrr: &e Angle, critical.
B~--s:
SmaU rings of ~cod, meta~ etc., forming part of balloon
nggmg, used for. oonmohon or adjustment of ropes.
CABLNE:A pyramdal framework upon the wing of an airplane, to
which sta , etc., are secured.
TIF
CAM13EE: e convexity or rise of the curve of an aercfoil from its
chord, usually exp-d
as the ratio of the mtium
departure
of the curve from the chord to the length of the chord. “Top
amber” refers to the top surface of an aerofo~, end ‘(bottom cam~ar~ to the bottom surface; ‘tmean camber” IS the mean of these
~A&:
See Load.
The cubic contents of a ballmn.
CENTU: O pre+wureo an aerqfd.-llhe
point in the plane of the
chords oi an aerofo.., prolonged if necessary, tbxough which at any
J
.ven attitude the hue of action of the resultant air force passes.
% his definition may be extended to any body.)
CEORD:
Of an aerofm7twction.-A
. ht Iine t cent at the front and
?
rear to the under curve Y an aerofoi section.
o
Len .—The kmgth of the chord is the Lmgth of the projection
oP the aerofoil section on the chord.
tiNOMETEB: See k!k031L13t=.
C!CmIENTF+TIO&eEmVrFekhoop to which are attached the ropes
C!O!Hsu:9
general ter& appl .
b the means provided for operating the devices used to contro speed, direction of flight, and
Y
attitude of an aircraft.
@rrEoL 00LEWN:The vwtiofd lever by means of which certh of
t~-principal controls are operated, usually those for pitching and

rolling.

how’s
moT: A system of diverging short ropes for distributing
the puU of a single rope.

—
..-

—

144

REPORT NATIONAL ADvISORYCOMMITI!EEFOX ARROI?AUTICS.

DECALAQE: The anglebetween the chords of the principal and the
tail planes of a mono lane.
corresponding angle I etwem~s=~~o~{e?$%?~;{og
of a biplane and the direction of a tail plane
sometimes lmown as the 10 “tudird V of thi tw~mm~?
h ah
.
DIHEDRAL AN AIRPLANE:
IN
~e rpgle umluded at t%e intersection
of the imaginary surfaoes oontammg the chords of the right and
left win
(continued to the plane of symmetry if necessary).
This
ye is measured in am lane perpendicular to that intersection. % e measure of the & edral IS taken as 90° minus one-half
of this angle as detied.
may and frequently does difTer
The dihedral of the upper “
from that of the lower wing in a ipkme.
-%
DIRIGIBLE: form of balloon, the outer envelope of which is of
A
tilongated form, provided mth a propelling systam, car, ruddem,
and stabilizin surfaces.
if?mriqid.-~ dirigible whose form is maintained by the pressure of the contained gas as&ted by the car-suspension system.
l@id.-A
dirigible whose form is maintained by a rigid structure oontained .mthin the env.elopo.
&miri.gid.-A
“ble whose form M maintained by means of
a rigid keel and y gas pressure.
?
DIVXNG
RTJDDEE: Elevator.
Soe
DOPE: A general term applied to the material used in treating the
cloth surface of airplane members and balloons to increase streng+
produce tautness, and act as a filler to maintain air-tightnew; It
USUSUhas a cellulose base.
DRAG: Jhe component parallel to the relative wind of the total
force on an aircraft due to the air through which it movw.
That art of the dram due to the wings is called “wing rcsistante” (?ormerly called ‘pMt” ); that due to the rest of the airplane
iEcalled’( arasite resistance” (formerly called” head resiatcnce” ).
DRIFT: See h
Also used as synonymous with” leewa ,“ g, v.
Drum METEE “ instrument for the measurement of d e angular
:%
deviation of an aircraft from a set oourse, due to cross winds.
DRIP CLO~: ,A curtain. around the e uator of a balloon, which
ELEVATOR: -d
‘revents ‘“”from
A
su ace or‘to ‘e~wk”t” longitudinal attitude
‘?’pi?
oontrolhng the
of an airoraft; I. e. ita rotation about the transveme axis.
EMPANNAGE: Tai!L
See
ENTERING
EWE: The foremost edge of m aerofoil or propeUer blade.
ENVELOPE: he portion of the balloon or dirigiile wluch contains
T
the gm.
EQUATOB: The largest horizontal circle of a spherical balloon.
FINS: Small tied aerofoils attached to different arts of aircraft,
in order to remote stability; for example, tail &s , skid fins, etc.
Fine are o?ten adjustable. They may be either horizontal or
vertical.
l?MQRTPATE: The path of the centar of gravity of an aircraft with
reference to the earth.
FLOAT:That portion of the landing gear of an airoraft which provides buo anc when it ie resting on the surface of the water.
FUSEIAQE:&elI’ ody.

AEBOXAUTTCS. 145
BEPORT NATIONAL AWISORY 00MMITTKE K’OR
GAP: The shortest distance betweau the phmes of the chords of the
upper and lower wings of a biphme.
&
BAG: See Envelope.
hE”:
To fly tithOllt
Gmmmi AC&t- of aimY t Se=t:
an airphme, but without any
.

When utikmd in variable wihds it makes use of the soaring
principles of flight and is aometim= caUed a soaring machine.
GoRE: he of the segments of fabric compos.
the envelope.
Y
GRomco OLOTH: rmas placed on the groun to protect aballoon.
G
GUIOEROPE:The long trailing rope attached to as herical balloon
or dirigible, to serve as a brake end as a variable %alkt.
GUY: A rope, cha@ wire, or rod attached tq an object to guide or
gear.
staady it such as gu to W@ tail, or lan
%
H.UNGAR: shed for r ousing bdioons or airp
~
es.
HimroommR: A form of aircraft whose support in the air is derived
from the vertical thrust of propellers.
Horm: A short arm fastened to a movable part of an airpIane, serving
as a Iever-arm, e. g., aiIeron40rn, rudder-horn, elevator-horn.
le made by any
LwomNonTEE: b instrument for methe
3
axis of an aircraft with the horimntal, often call a clinometer.
kwEcTIox WJXOOW: small transparent window in the ehveIope
A
of 5 balloon or in the wing of an airplane to allow inspection of
the interior.
“* towhne ‘0‘i*pu’
‘*er
‘m
*e
pall, ‘f ‘“’t support u dermd rqm- the orce of the wmd
whose
om
mov@ past its surface.
LANDING
~=:
The understructure of an airoruft d&gned to carry
the load when resting on or running on the surface of the land
or watar.
ZEADrm EDGE: See Entering edge.
LEEWAY: The @ar
deviation from a set course over the earth,
due to cross currents of wind: aiso called drift ;hen~, ” drift metisr.”
Lmr: The component perpenchcular to the rdative wind, in a vertical
phme, of the force on an aerofoil due to the air pressure caused by
motion thro h the air.
k
mcmW: % e Stay.
LOAD
:
D~m—dM structur~ power plant, and essentiaI accessories of an
F~.—I’h~ maximum weight which an aircraft can support @
ht; the “gross we. t.”
Uii zd.-The excess of %?e full load over the dead weight of the
7
mrcraft ibelf, i. e., over the we. ht of its structure, power
- Iastmust bespectied.)
pIant, and essential accessories. L
I.c)umw: See Wing, loading.
hBES: Bags at the stern of an elongated balkon designed to give
it directional stability.
Lcmmmox See Longitudinal.
Lomxrumxu:
A fore-mid-aft member of the framing of an airplane body, or of the floats, usuaIly continuous across a number of
points of support.
291s5”+. Ilec.~ 65-2-1o

.—

146

REPORT
NAHONW ADVISORYCO~TTEE

FOR AERONAUTIC%

MONOPLANE: A form of ..airplane whose main su porting surface is
%
a single wing, extending equally on each side of t e body.
Mooram BAND:The band of tape over the top of a balloon to
which are attached the mooring ro es.
NAOELLE: ee Body. Limited to pust ers.
S
I?ET: A rigging made of ro es and twine on spherical balloons,
which supports the entire f’oad carried.
C)R~rrHoFTER: fo~ of f+mraft deriving its support and propelA
hng force fro+ fl?ppm -.
PANEL: The u.mt plec.e of fabric of which the envelope is made.
PMLAOHUTE: a paratus, made like an umbrelk, used to retard
An
the descent of a ! ding bod .
PATCHSYSTEM: system o[ construction in which patches (or
A
adhesive flaps) are used in place of the suspension band.
PERMEABILITY:
The measure of the loss of gas by diffusion through
the intact balloon fabric.
l?rwr TC~E: A tube with an end open square tQ the fluid stream
used as a detector of an impact preesure. It is usuauY associated
with a coaxkd tube surrounding it, having perforations normal to
the axis for indicating static reasure; or there is such a tube placed
near it and parallel to it wi &a closed.conicalendandhavingperforations in its side. !&e velocity of the fluid can be determmed
from the difference betvman the impact pure
and the static
pressure, as read b a suitable gauge. &la instrument is often
used to detmmine ti!! veIocity of au aircxaft through the air.
e
PoNTooNs: See Float.
Pusmm: See Airplane.
l%LON: A mast or pillar serving as a marker of a coume.
RACE OF A PROPELL~: See Sh stream.
Rwm
wnm: The motion o4’ the air with reference to a moving
body. Its direction and velocit~, therefore, are found by adding
two vectcna, one being the veloclty of the air with reference to the
earth, the other being ecpd and opposite to the velocity of the body
with reference to the earth.
RrP corm: The rope iunning from the rip panel of a balloon to the
basket, the pulhng of wluch causes immediate deflation.
RIP PANEL:A strip m the upper part of a balloon which is tan off
when immediate deflation N dewred.
RUDDER:A hinged or pivoted surface, usualIy more or 1= flat or
stream lined, used for the purpose of controlling the attitude of
an aircraft about its “vertical” reds, i. e., for controlling its lateral
movement.
Rudder bar.-The foot bar by means of which the rudder is operSnn&~d’A
particular form of airphme in which the lauding gesr
is suited to operation from the water.
SERPENT: A shor$ heav guide rope.
SrDrn
srmwrNQ:SMing i ownward and inward when m@ing a turn;
due to excessive banking. It is the opposite of skid
?
SmoDIN~: Sliding sideways away from the center of t ~ turn in
flight. It is usually caused by insu.ilicientbanking in a turn, and
is the opposite of side slipping.

..

RRPORT NATIONW

ADVISORYCOXXHTTEE FOE AERONAUTICS.

147

$mns: Ikmg woodm or met~ runners dtsigned to prevent nosing of
a hmd machine when Ian
or to prevent dropping into holes or
ditches in rough ground. %
erally ddgned to function shouId
the h3m3inggem collapse or faiI to act.
rwcm The stmun of air driven sft by
STREAM PROEEtLEE
OB
the propeller and with a velocity relative to the airplane greater
than that of the surrounding body of still air.
SOMUN~MA~:
See Glider.
SPANOR SFEIZA+: he maximum distance IaterWy horn ti to tip of
T
an airpkme
, or the Iateml dimension of an wrofo z
STABILITY:A T “ty in virtue of which an .airpIane in flight tads
gu
ht distwbance.
to return to Its revious attitude after a
%
Directwd. 4 tability with refenmce to t e vertical axis.
Dgmzmical-l!he quality of an aircraft in ~ht which causes it
to return to a condition of equilibrium afta its attitude has
return to equih rmm IS ue to two factors; ‘“g-’ a~ke~
fit,
ba-b?rnw~somebtibmm’
right% moments of the structure; second, the damping of the
mcilhtions by the t~ etc.
1n7urm#.+3tabiWy of an aircraft due to the disposition md arrangement of its fixed pa@+.
e., that roperty which causes
itto return to its normaI attitude of fiig t without the use of
%
the controls.
LuttjZ&.-tIity
with reference to the longitudinal (or fore
Lon@udinul.>tabiIi@
with reference to the Iaterd axis.
Stab.c(i?.-h
wind tunnel expqrimenta it is found that there
is a ddnite angle of attack such that for a
::
a Iess one the righting moments are in sucF:L%%!:
teud to make the attitude return to this angle. This holds
true for a certain
of angles on each side of this definite
m@e; and the ma “ e is said to possws “statical sta%
bihty” through this range.
STABmZEE: Any device designed to steady the motioq of aircrdt.
eoftiheu
per
STAGGER: The amount of advance of the entering
9
wing of a bipkme over that of the lower, expresse as percenf .oe
of gap; it is considered ositive when the upper surface ISforw &
ing the condition of an airpkme which
%’AIUNG: A term d &
from any cause has Iost the relative speed necessary for cnnhxd.
STATOSCOPE:An instrument to detect the existence of a small rate of
sscent or descent, princip~
used in balk)oning.
arti
STAY: A wire, rope, or the d e used as a tie pmce to hold
tigether or to contribute stiffness; for ~ample, the stays oF the
wing and body trussing.
STEP: A break m the form of the bottom of a float.
SmmAM-umz FLOW:A terminh dronmchanics to describe the condition of continuous flow of a 1 uid, as distinguished from eddying
flow.
sTiiAi&-LmE
SHAPE: A sh8pe intended to avoid eddying and to preserve stream-line flow.
n member of a truss frame; for instance, the
of the wing truss of a bi Iane.
SUSPEIWSION
RAND: The band around a b 5 oon to which are attached the basket and the ti
bridle suspensions.

—.

—

148

BEPORT NATIONAL ADVISORYCOMMITTEE FOE AERONAUTKM

SUSPENSION :
w
The bar used for the concentration of basket suspension ropes in captive balIoons.
SWEEPBACIK: he horizontal angle betweau the lateral axk of an
T
airplane and the entering edge of the main lana
TAIL: The rear portion of an wrcraft, to whit\ are usually attached
rudders, elevatora, stabilizers and b.
TAIL OUPS:The steadying device attached at the rear of certain
!lh~LE: O’elOYbdcalt’ve metal eye sphced in tho end of a rope or
‘p
b
ongate
bdoom” “
cable.
Ta.mroE: See “ lane.
% e rearmost edge of an awofoil or propd~er blade.
EDGE:
~~
TErPUNE: A form of airplane whose main supporting surface is
divided into three parts, superimposed.
TRUSS:The framing by which the wing loads are transmitted to
the body; comprises strats, stays, and spars.
UmmmoUmQE: See Lanolin ear.
WMW: To change the form o?% e wing by t-ivistin it.
WASH OUT:A permanent warp of. an aerofod su3 that the single
of attack decreases toward the wmg tips.
Wmarr: Gross. See Load, full.
Wmcw: The main supporting surfaces of an airplane.
“
Wnw FLAP: See Aileron.
WrNc+- QADrNQ:
L
The weight carried per unit area of supporting
surface.
Wm-~ u:
The mast structure projecting above the wing, to which
the top load wires are attached.
WING RIB: A fore and aft member of the wing structure used to
support the covering and to give the_wing section its form.
BEAM:A transverse member of the wing strucWmT~SPAB OE mm
ture.
YAW: To swing off the course about the mrtical axis.
AngZeof.—’l%e temporary angular deviation of the foreand aft
axis from

the c4mrse.

q

