REPORT No. 43.
SYNOPSIS OF AERONAUTIC RADIATOR INVESTIGATIONS FOR YE&W
1917 AND 1918.~
By H. C. DICKINSONand IL V. KIJUNECHMJDT.

During the past year an extensive swim of experiments has been conducted at the Bureau
of Standards to determine the properti~ of cuoling radiator cores now manufactured for airplanes and to develop improvements in d#gn.
The ardysia of the problem on which this
work was based, and consequently the exp erimental method empIoyed, is different from that
commonly used. Instead of attempting to tmt oomplete radiatom, eitlw full size or in models,
uniform sections repr~entiug different type of core construction have been tested and an
analyBis of the reaulta made with a view to detwmbing independently the various factors
which infiuenoe its performance. From these results deductions may be made as to the performance of a radiator U.nda &ny conditions.
The factors considered are:
(1) The characteristic of the core structure, inchIaing depth, size, and shape of air and
water passagm, nature of the metal and of the surfacm from which cooling takm place, and
the amount and design of indirect cooling surface or ti.
(2) The conditions of use, inoluding the amount of air flowing through the core (mass
flow), the relation of the looation on the plane b the mnount of air flowing through the core es
influenced by the phme speed, the tied of variable temperature of air and waterj variable
air density, and the ef%ct of variable rate of water flow.
The performance of a type of core is expressed by giving the properties of the core as
defined below, together with gene.d relations showing the ohange of properties with change in
cmuilitions and characteristic from which the performance of any radiator of the same core
structure can be predicted.
Since the completion of this work, reporta recekd from England and France have shown
that many of these questions have already been studied there, and the rwdta agree substantiality with those obtained by this bureau. The work on akitude has, we believe, not been
duplicated elsewhere, and the range of air speeds over which the observations extend has
been increased in most cases.
In the work done in Europe, the heat dissipated by the radiator has commonly been measured by pkwing the radiator specimen to be tested in a wind tunnel, the cross sectional area
of whioh wss at le& three times that of the specimq since this was supposed to represent
most nearly the conditions found in actual use. The method of attack adopted in this invwtigation calls for a more cMnite demription of the condition of air flow through the radiator, in
order to slIow the performance of a radiator in any position on the pkme to be determined.
A careful distinction must be made between the speed of the air approaching the radiator,
or the speed at which the radiator is being carried through the air (free airspeed), and the amount
of air which actually passes through the radiator (m= flow). When experiments are made in
a bulkhead tunnel (a tunnel in whioh the speoimen completely blocks the channel) all the air
which flows through the tunnel is forced through the tubes of the speoimen; while when the
specimen is supportid in a tunnel whose oross sectional area is large reIative h the specimen,
the amount of air flowing through the specimen depends upon the character of ifs design.
In the British reports mention is made of the d@ring results obtained as tieoted by
the kind of tunnel used. Their conclusion was to use the resuhe obtained b the free air tunnel.
ofrodahd
L Repart~umffdeDtfsIIY
W

dnrhs the war M Bureauof Sbtiartis AmmanW powar Hanta Report NIA
477

-.

.—- —-.
49.

.. .

478

ANNUAL

REPORT

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMM11EN3E FOR AERONAUTICS.

The French attempted to measure the ‘(penetration de l’air” by means of pitot tuhw placed
at various distances in front of and behind the radiator, but the rwdte are only comparative
and furnish no m&mre of the actual maw flow of air.
Since the air which actually flows through the core determines the heat dissipated, determinations of the heat dissipated in terms of free airspeed are not applicable directly ta radiators
placed in any position where the flow of air is obstructed. Consequently, heat transfer and
other properties of cores have been measured and exprwsed in terms of the mass flow of air
through the core. A specially designed air Venturi has been devised with which this mass
flow of air can be mm.sured, at least roughly, under ahnmt any conditions, and can be obtained
hy laboratory tests iu the case of u radiator placed in the free air with all the accuracy required.
In general, the mass flow constant wili he defined as the ratio of the mass of air actually
which
would pass through the same area if it were unobpassing through the mdiator to t.~ld
structed.
From the above discussion of mass flow and free air speed it is seen that there are two
general CISSSW positions in which a radiator maybe placed on the plane, either that in which
of
the mass flow through the radiator is dependent solely on the properties of the core, or when
it depends also upon the locatimr mr-the ,phme.
If the radiator is placed so that the air may paSSthrough or around it without obstruction,
it is said to be in an unobstructed position, and the properties of the radiator so placed are
dependent solely upou the characteristics of the core, so that the effect of the radiator on the
phme may be computed from the resuh of laboratory teeta, In particuhr, the power which
is required to carry the radiator, that is, to lift its weight and overcome ita head resistance,
may be computed.
If the heat dissipated by an unobstructed radiator is expressed in horsepower (1 IL P-42,4
B. t. u. per minute) this quantity maybe divided by the power akaorbed in carrying the radiator,
both at the same free air speed, and the rdt
will be a quantit~which expresses the efikiency
of the radiator and may be used to compare various typee of core.
This quantity is called the
“Figure of Merit,” and is the critwion for a core to be used in an unobstructed position.
When the air flow around the radiator is maiawhdly interfered with by other parts of the
The nose of the fuselage and in the plane of the
plane, the radiator is said to be obstrwhd.
wing are the most important obstructed positions. The air flow through such a radiator (i. e.,
its mass flow constaat), and consequently the cooling and other properties depend, not onIy
on the type of core, but on the position and surroundhgs. If the air flow through the coro is
known, the heat transfer cau be found from tests such as have been carried out on a large
number of cores at this bureau, The absorption of powar which is chwgedle to the radiator
depends, however, not ouly on the properties of the core but on what decreasas in totaI reAstance could be obtained by structural aerations in the plane if the radiator were not required.
The figure of merit of such a radiator can consequently be found accurately only by experiments on models of ea~’htype of phne or by tests on full size planes.
An indicatio~l of the desirable propertk for such a core can be obtained by uoting thtit
the.resistance to the iiow of air through the core is composed of the resistance of the core and
the resistance offered by the surrounding portions of the plane. In the case of a core phwed
in the nose of the fuselage the latter res.istanre is large compared with the reaktance of the
core itieIf. It is therefore de&rabIe to use, in an obstructed position, a core having a large
amount of effective cooling surface per square foot of frontal area so that with a given air flow
the maximum amount of heat may be dissipated.
At the end of this report there are given curves showing the propertim of two of the best
typasiof core for use in unobstructed positions (plots 1 and 2) and two of the best-types for
use in obstructed positions (plots 3 and 4) thabhave been tested.
The energy dissipated is given in horsepower per square foot of frontal area of core when
there is a temperature difference of 100° F. betwwn the entering air and the mean of the teruperatures of the entering and leaving water. It has been shown that the energy dissipated
may be assumed to be proportional to the temperature difference as thus dhed and to vary
directly as the froutal area of the radiator.

SYNOPSIS

OF AERONAUTIC

RADIATOR

al

r
G a’

I

I-

7

1

4

1

1

,

6

Plotm,1.- Ws.Stiowof.4iAf~sqti~sec.

,

a

10°

INVESTIGATIONS

FOR YEARS

WY

AND

1918.

479

480

ANNUAL

REPORT

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

.—, ———..
It@—

COMMITTEE

FOR AERONAUTICS.

-.—

- —..

ffl

w

/

,La?

$
~(w
t
m
4%’
.49
.20

0

5

/5

M
Altitude

P/of Ho. 5

1 .—
—-- ———

20

2.5

in 7Z&tsonu!s

EFFECT-W

WA

30

3

offeet

7?+ViLLZ/7Y

on EnergyDiss@ni?dperMO

OfmMpti

—-

“E TmpLWf~m
Free AirSpeed.

.— ....—
83

4

f

8

Wu*rF..0Wh

/2

‘

h5

go~ perrnin.per fk

20
kvfb%

a
of Cons.

28

S3!XOPSIS

OF AERONAUTKI

BADIATOE

INVESTIGATIONS

FOE YEARS

~17 AND N18.

481

The head resistance is the force on the radiator when the air sfrilm it rtorndly.
It is
expressed in pounds per square foot of frontal area for an air density of 0.0750 pounds per
cubic foot.
The horsepower absorbed per square foot of frontal exea is computed by dividing the weight,
in pounds per square foot frontal area, by a E&-drift ratio (for m average phme) of 5.4, adding this to the head reaistmce in pounds per square foot frontal area and multiplying the sum
by the free air speed in miles per hour and by a conversion factor (1/375) to obtain horsepower.
It must be remembered that this quantity is of significance only in the case of an unobstructed
radiator, sirmeit is under free air conditions that the head resistance is measured. Considered
as a function of the mass flow through the radiator it is probable that this vaIue represents the
minimum possible absorption of power in the case of an obstructed radiator, and that to it
must be added any resistance due to obstruction of the air after passing through the core.
Power absorbed by r&stance caused by necessary akwations of the fuselage horn the bwt
streamline form possible without the radiatir must also be charged to the radiator.
The figure of merit, as explained above, is the ene~ Wlpated by a radiator whioh absorbs
one horsepower. It ako is of signMcance, as cmmputed, ordy for an unobstructed radiator.
It must not ba confused with the British “@ure of merit,” which is a quantity of the same
sort, but which is expressed in arbhsry units.
The curve sheets also contain the most important structural characteristics of the cores,
namely, the depth, the total mea of the caoling surfaca per square foot front, the percentage
of the total surface which is direct (backed by flowing water), the percentage free area (the
percentage of the total frontal area whioh is oeeupied by the air tubes), the weight of the core
empty per square foot, and the weight of the water contained in a square foot of core.
E~ect of rah of waterjlow.-fi<e effect of watar vcdocity on the heat dissipated is shown
in plot 6. It indicates that at water flows commonly used in practice the energy dissipated,
when the mean water temperature is used in computing the temperature ditlerenee, is not
affected by the rate of water flow. At low water veIooities it decreases rapidly. The same
gened behavior is shown by all the types of core tested.
Since in practice the temperature of the entering water must not be too near boiling,
tmd the temperature drop in the water will decrease with immeased water flow, the mean
water temperature may be somewhat higher with a high rate of ilow than with a low one.
This consideration points to the use of a water flow of from on-fourth to one-half galion per
minute per horsepower to be dissipated, the latter value being d&rable if the resistance of
the radiator to water flow is not too great.
The work on the performance of radiators at high altitudes (see Report No. 62) carried out
in a wind tunnel indosed in a steeI tank from whioh the air odd be partially exhausted, has
shown that the heat dissipated by a radiator will be constant for a given mass flow of air,
regardless of air density, and that the head resistance probably varies directly as the density
for a given free air sped.
We may assume that the energy dissipated varies directly as the
temperature difference, as defined above.
P1ot 5 contains two curves marked “Temperature factor” and “Density factor,” respectively. The temperature factor is the approximate ratio of the temperature difference (betwean
air and water) likely to be encountered at an altitude to that to whioh the ground tests are
reduced, viz, 100° F. The density factor is the ratio of the probable density of the air at an
altitude to that to which the ground tests me reducad, viz, 0.0750 lb./ou. ft. These two curves
are based on the assumption of a mean summer temperature and density of air and a mean
water temperature 30° F. below the boiling point. They accordingly represent only one of
many conditions that might be met and are given for the sake of illustration.
With these factors and the experimental facts mentioned above, the performance of a
radiator at any altitude can be estimated from the performance at ground as follows:
Energy @i@ate-d.~btain
the mass flow at the given altitude by muhiplying the mess
flow at ground by the density factor. Obtain the energy dissipated per 100° F. (actual) from
the curve of energy dkipatsd in terms of mass flow, as determined in laboratory tests, and
multiply this edisipated by the temperature faotor.
Doe.
16iOS0-S. 30?, ~31

..-.

—..r

—

—.

..—
.

482

MUTUAL

REPORT

Heud re&tance.-MultipIy

NATIONAL

ADVISORY

COMMITTEE

FOE Al?M)NA~(M.

the head resistance at ground by the density factor.
w@ht fIUed speed in mi./hr. ~ where weight
J?or8epouwrahw$ed= Head resistiume+~~~o
375
)
)(
(
is in pounds per squsre foot of frontal area.
ener
dissipated
Figi.we of ??writ
=home::wm *bsorbecl”

