CA

FI

COpy

REPORT No. 11.
(I N SEVEN P ARTS.)

CARBURETOR DESIGN-A PRELIMINARY STUDY
OF THE STATE OF THE ART.

/
I

\

By CHARLES EDWARD LUCKE.
Pro/u&or 0/ M echanical Enginuring.
Assisted by FRIEDERICH OTIO WILLHOFFI' •

.Auu/an/ P ro/t380T 0 M echanical EngimtTing.
/

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK CITY.

(

I

"

'-"~

'

.;

""

~".

. A

"

CONTENTS OF REPORT No. 11.
PART I.
Palt6.

I ntroduction.-Nature of th e probl em and scope of the present contribution.-The carburetor as a mixture maker.-General r eview of
carburetion.-Processes and the fund a mental importance of the
proportioning flow principle for fu els th at tend to fractionate on
vaporization.-Importance of speCifications for mixtures and relation of proporti onali ty to other factors______ ___ _______ ____ ______

55

PART II.
Carburetor patents of tbe United Stat es.-Di stribution tbrough the
official classes and s ubclasses, and diyision in to, "Proportioning
flow carburetors " a nd other subjects ______ ___________ ____ ______ _
(a) Li. t of a ll the patents with number, date, inyentor's nnme, and title
of the paten t for each one of a selected group of offiCial and sub·
classes, of classes 48 and 123;
(b) Cross r eference pa tents of tbe official cross r eference lis t for the
same gr oup (a) ;
(c) List of selected patents from other classes and subclasses that contain some carburetors with simila r data fo r each;
(d) Cross r eference patents f or tbe group (c ).

71

PART III.
Kew class ificat ion and assignment of carburetors________ ______________
(a) New clas ification of carburetors of the" propo rt ioning flow" type,
on a r a tiona l basis of similarities aud differences, both of structure nn d of functiona l opern tion_________________ ____ ___________
(b) Assignment to these new classes and subclasses of a ll Un ited States
patents of tbe "proportioning fl ow " type, found in the official lists
of Part II, (a), (b), (c), and (d) ; constituting a new Jist of all
enited States pa t ents containing pt'oportioning flow carburetors
a rranged accor ding to the new classification___ _____ ___ ______ ____

145
145

156-

PART IV,
St ructur al characteristics and fun ctional operation of ench of the new
classes and subclasses of proportioning fl ow carburetors with illust rations of the ,ari ations in form for each subclass taken from the
patent draw ings of typi cal ca es ____ ____________________________
Summary of characteristics of new classes and conclusions on type______

169
440

PART V.
Flow

l a~-s

fo r gases and liquids, with special r eference to air a nd gasoline, in passages of the sort found in carburetors as to form and
size. -Re,iew of coefficients or tes t da ta found in the liter atu re of
leterminations, but
t he subject, without any new experimental c
indicating the need of such:
(a) Formulas for the flo w of fluids, based on hydraulic and thermodyna mic laws ____ ________ ___ ______ ____ ___ __ ____________ _______
(b) Actual flow r a te for gases.-Result of experimental inyestigations.Coeffic ients fo r formu las given in Part V (a,) for gas flow_ _______
( c ) Actual flow r ates fo r liquids__ ___ _____ ____ __ _____ _______ __________
53

453"
459
464.

54

AERONAUTICS.

PART VI.
New experimental determinations of the p roportioning accuracy of a
selected numbe r of typi cal American commercial carburetors under
va riations of flow conditions:
(a)

New test results on carburetor proportlonallty____________________

471

(b)

Discussion of the literature of carb uretor tests_______ _____________

544

PART VII.
Conclusions and r ecommendatious__________________ ________ __________

-'

551

REPORT No. 11.
PART I.

By

CHARLES

E.

LUCKE.

INTRODUCTION-NATURE OF THE PROBLEM AND SCOPE
OF THE PRESENT CONTRIBUTION.
Any effort to improve the gasoline engine and to J?er£ect it for
use, in aeronautic, marine, and land transportation servlce, must proceed along a series of more or less parallel coordinate lines of attack, each concerned with some one mdependent phase of the problem, after a general review has indicated the nature of these subsidiary problems and their relations. Such a general review with
special reference to aero engines has already been made and formed
the subject matter of the report of last year. In addition to the specific probl~ms of engine design proper, in,olving arrangement of
parts, selection and treatment of materials, and determmation of
best diemnsions for strength or life on the one hand and large mean
effective pressures with high thermal efficiency at high speeds on the
other, there is another group concerned with what might be termed
the engine auxiliary functions. These latter include ignition, lubrication, cooling, and last, but most important of all, carburetion. It is
most important because it is concerned with the making of suitable
mixtures, without which the engine can not be a success no matter
how perfectly the other phases of the engine problem may be worked
out. It bears the same relation to the gasoline engine as steam making does to the steam engine, and the carburetor, with its connections
by which the result is attained, is just as important to the former as
is the steam boiler and its connections to the latter. This being the
case, it is logical and proper that this the second report, and the first
•.me following the general review, should be concerned with the carburetor and the problems of its design. The complexity of the prob.
lem of carburetor design, from the scientific engmeering standpoint
as distinguished from the empiric cut and try one, can hardly be overrated, and the difficulties involved are realized only by those familiar
with the question by reason of experience and extended study. It
involves not only many unknown facts and relations of the physics
of flow of this class of liquids in small passages and of air at v-ariable rates through every conceivable shape of duct and orifice within
certain limits of size, but it also requires the crossing of the borderland of knowledge on the :physical chemistry of these complex fuels,
their vapors, and vapor aIr mixtures; fuels which are solutions of
many and variable constituents, all of them having tendencies under
55

56

AERO::-<AUTICS.

certain conditions to polymerize. In additio n to these difficulties of
a
physical-chemical sort, there are involved two other groups , the first
being the usual one of structu ral design, and the second that of definition of the object to be attaine d. With reference to the latter
it
must be admitt ed that there is no convincing experim ental proof
ayaliable from engine tests to definitely estabfish just what sort
of
mixtures give the best results in engine s; whether, for example, they
should be consta nt or variabl e in propor tions of air to fuel, and
whethe r also they should be dry or wet, and if the latter, how much
moisture is permis sible and in what form. To be sure, opinions and
deductions of some ,alue can be based on indirec t observ ations and
certain princip les, but works of import ance should be based on
proyed facts and not on opinions or deductions. P ending the on
establishment of the require d physical-chemical data and the specifications of suitabi lity of mixtur es from the engine standp oint, both
of
which must constit ute a separa te series of investi gation, the
lem of carbur etor design may be approa ched with some profit probfrom
the qualitative side.
Design of any applian ce or machin e must be lJndert aken qualita
ti\ely before any quantit ati;-e work is wan-anted , the former being
concerned with the form and arrang ement of the parts and the
.
latter with their dimensions. Qualit ati\e design, the fixing of
the
natlll'e and form of the se'-eral necessary structu ral elements and
their mutual relatio n or arrang ement, must satisfy ten indepe ndent
sorts of require ments- first, functio nal, and second, constructional
With reference to the former it is clear that to make the appara .
tus
work th ere must be provid ed certain parts suitabl y arrang ed and
the selection of such forms and arrang ements of parts as would seem
to promise the sort of action or functIOn desired, is termed inventi
on
when the same thin a has not been done before in the same way,
otherw ise it is mere~y the first phase of qualita tiye design. The
second or constru ctional requirement for qualita ti\e design impose
s
a limit on the first, dictate d by the tools and processes of the shop.
Howeyer nice and proper an applian ce or machin e scheme maJ'
from the functio nal standp oint, it is obviously of no ,-alue If be
can not be -eonstr ucted and of little value if the constru ction it
is
difficult, so as to inYoh-e excessiye cost, inacclll'acy, or some other
element of unsuita bility.
Quanti tative design, the determ ination of proper dimensions, for
the parts as selected and arrang ed, must also meet two indepe ndent
require ments, or rather there are two sets of dimensions that
be separat ely determ ined because they have different objects. must
first phase of quanti tatiye design must fix those dimensions thatThe
are
concerned with functio nal operati on and directl y supple ment the
selection of form and relatio n of structlll'al elE'ments, so
only will the sort of result desired be attaine d, but also in that not
just
right degree. The second step in the whole series fixes those the
dimensions of the parts that inSlu'e, with due reference to the materials, suitabl e streng th and stiffness to resist ruptur e and
deflection, respectively, under stress, and that insure suitablundue
e life
to parts subject to destruc tion by wear or corrosion, for example.
Apply ing these genera l princip les to the case of carbur etor design,
the first phases of both the qualita tive and the quanti tative design

AERONAUTICS.

57

are of controlling importance, both of the second phases dwindling
to almost negligible quantities in comparison. For example, the
second phase of quantitative design, the fixing of dimensions for
strength and life, is almost, if not quite, eliminated by the fact that
the parts of carburetors are subjected to no stresses that can not
easily be resisted by the thinnest metal that can be cast, and that, so
far as life is concerned, there is no corrosion with the brasses and
bronzes in use. While there is some "ear in those carburetors that
have moving parts and some permanent set in springs, it also is
true that good carburetors need have neither wearing parts nor
springs. Again, the second phase of qualitative design, which imposes shop limitations on form and arrangement, requires no special
treatment for carburetors over any other device or small manufactured metal product made mainly or wholly of cast metal with some
rough and some accurate machining, involving only light cuts and
short operations easily carried out with small tools of standard form
with special jigs and fixtures or with special tools.
It appears, therefore, that an investigation of carburetor design
must be concerned almost entir ely with the first phases of both qualitative and quantitative design, the selection of these schemes of form
and arrangement of parts that promise the right sort of functioning
and results, and then dimensioning the parts so they will produce
the desired kind of result in the required degree. These two steps
might well be called qualitative functional design and quantitative
functional design, respectively.
There are two good reasons why qualitative functional design
should be undertaken before the quantitative- first, because the necessary physical data for the latter hnTe ne,er been determined, only
a few isolated facts being available, and second, because the determin ation of dimensions must necessarily follow a decision on form,
or otherwise the more that form alternati,es can be reduced to a
minimum, the less is the variety and scope of the pertinent physical
data required for application to them.
This r eport is concerned almost exclusively with an analysis of
the question of qualitative design, not only because it is logically the
first step to undertake but also because its scope is so very wide and
ihe amount of available material requiring review so large as to hnse
taken up all of the time available. .
Quantitative design has been approached but not actively attacked;
only so much has been done in this direction as to point out the
need of thorough investigation by showing the importance and the
present lack of exact dn tao
Qualitative functional design of carburetors must begin with an
examination of alternative processes of carburetion, and a selection
of one or more such processes as seem promising must be made before
any attempt is made to scheme out the form and arrangement of
the parts that together shall constitute the carburetor. Carburetion
as a process is in the broad sense essentia lly the same as humidification, the former dealing originally only with the hydrocarbon
products of petroleum but now with any liquid fuel including the
alcohols, the-latter with water, and both with vaporization of thehquid
in contact with air, the vapors and the air mixing more or less
homogeneously. The thermodynamic laws of such vapor-air mix-

58

AERONAUTIOS.

tures as result from carburetion or humidification are pretty firmly
established, and the most important of these, with reference to the
present object, is that group relating the partial pressures of the
vapor and the air in the mixture to the proportions of vapor and
air and to the respective molecular weights. In accordance with
these relations, a mixture of vapor and air in any desired proportions
can be obtained by maintaining an intimate contact between the
liquid and the air until such time as saturation results by the building up of the partial pressure of the vapor in the mixture to a value
equal to the pressure of saturated vapor corresponding to the temperature. Thus the proportions are determined by the vapor pressure-temperature law of the liquid, by the actual conditions of
contact or intimacy beb,een the two, and by the temperature mixture during the time of contact. Of these three factors one is a
physical property of a given liquid and the other two reJ?resent
variables of use, and are subjeot to control if the apparatus IS suitably designed. The vapor-pressure curves of the more common
simple liquids have been determined, and for them these principles
point directly to a simple and highly effective process of carburetion
in definite predetermined proportions, the process being to maintain for sufficient time a close and intimate contact of the air and
the liquid, such as may be done by blowing air over, bubbling it
through the liquid~ spraying the liquid in the air, or stirring and
heating the two in a chamber, meanwhile keeping the temperature
constant at the value required by the vapor pressure-temperature
curve to give the desired proportions.
Such a process of carburization may properly be called evaporative
because the proportions are fixed by the evaporative conditions. The
liquid vaporizes, and vapor is added to the air until equilibrium is
established between the vapor pressure of the liquid, and the partial
pressure of the vapor in the mixture in contact with the liquid. This
evaporative process of carburization to given proportions is almost
ideal where it is feasible, but unfortunately its value is confined entirely to the simple liquids that have definite vapor pressure-temperature relations and the same relations for every part of the liquid.
The only liquids that satisfy this condition are those that are single
chemical compounds and among the fuels these are benzol and the
pure alcohols, the more common fuels such as the impure alcohols or
alcohol-water ·solutions, and all the products of petroleum, including
not only the light but the intermediate constituents, do not satisfy
the condition for proper evaporative carburization in given proportions by the simple evaporation process. These latter liquids fuels
are solutions of many constituents one in the other, each constituent
to be sure is a simple hydrocarbon with fixed physical properties, but
the solution has variable physical properties. The presence of one
substance in solution in another, affects its vapor pressure in a fairly
well-known way, but there is no means of predicting what is the resultant of 10 such, each affecting the other. Physical chemistry has
not advanced far enough to answer such a question, and it is doubtful
if the answer would be of much value even if it could be found in
the absence of equally definite, simple, and practical analytical means
of identifying and evaluating the separate hydrocarbon constituents
of such solutions as the gasohnes and kerosenes, which organic chem-

AERONAUTICS.

59

istry so far has failed to discover. From the practical carburetor
standpoint enough is known to definitely condemn the simple evaporative proportioning process without such scientific data, because it
is clear that those constituents that have the highest vapor pressures
will exist in the vapor air mixture in larger proportions to those
that have low vapor pressures, than they did originally in the liquid
mass, and that, as evaporation proceeds there will be a fractionation
that leaves the heavy constituents behind. The mixture proportions
in such cases will be fixed as much by the ratio of constituents in the
liquid as by the vapor pressure of anyone-by the intimacy of air
contact or by the temperature-but the ratio of constituents in the
liquid varying as it does as evaporation proceeds, the proportions of
vapor to air in the mixture can not possibly be controlled automatically by any simple and practical means.
The condemnation of the evaporative means of proportioning as
a carburetion process for engine use for all liquid fuels that fractionate at once removes from consideration a very large number of
older carburetors designed for and used largely m connection with
the manufacture of illuminating or fuel gas for pipe distribution
and confines attention to a newer group of carburetors in which the
proportions of air to fuel are subJect to mechanical control and are
quite independent of the constituents of the fuel or their vapor
pressures.
Mechanical proportioning is an essential element of any practical
carburetion process where complex fuels, like the petroleum distillates, are to be converted into vapor air mixtures in controlled proportions for introduction into an engine cylinder; but, of course,
mechanical proportioning does not of itself constitute a carburetion
process except under one condition. If the vapor pressure of the
fuel, or, rather, of its heaviest constituent, be high enough, then
mere introduction of the fuel into the air, especially if both be flowing through passages that produce eddy mixin&, currents, will r esult
in immediate vaporization and the formation ot the desired mixture.
All the older gasolines of 76° Baume and upward had this property,
so for them a mechanical proportioner that feeds a measured amount
of gasoline into an air stream does in reality constitute a proportioning carburetor. The present-day gasolines, ranging but little above
60° Baume, and in some cases lower, have some constituents so heavy
and with vapor pressures so low as to require either special spraying
and stirring elements or heaters to produce a suitable homogeneous
mixture, the making of which constitutes carburetion. Nevertheless
such proportioning devices are also termed carburetors, even though
vaporization is not complete, because they produce mixtures on which
engines can be operated, and since the proportions are established by
a sort of metering action of the fuel by the flowing air, and not by the
vaporizing properties of the fuel, they have been named" proportioning flow carburetors" in this report.
For all gasolines, kerosenes, or other petroleum distillates, and any
other complex fuel to be used in engines, proportioning flow carburetion processes must displace the older evaporative processes of the
~as industry, so attention must be concentrated on the various ways
1Il which the air flowing toward an engine cylinder may be made to
J:.>roportionately meter, receive, and become mixed with the amount

60

AERONAUTICS .

of fuel it can support in explosive combustion quite independent of
just what degree of vaporization or just what proportions will work
best in a given engine on the assumption that these are independent
variables.
.
The pure case of proportionate flow carburetion is that in which
the air flow directly, without the medium or interposition of any
connecting mechanism, does of itself induce or produce the fuel flow
in amount always proportionate to the amount of air, simultaneously
mixing the two more or less actively with or without the addition of
heat. This process depends upon the laws of flow of air and of
liquid fuel, relating rate of flow to pressure drop or flow head, and,
in general, it assumes that the suction stroke of an engine piston
establishes a vacuum of some degree in every portion of the air
entrance passage, which vacuum ,aries regularly with the quantity
of air that will flow under its impelling influence. It also assumes
that if from a supply of fuel at a constant hydraulic head a connection be led to a fuel nozzle somewhere in the air passage, the static
head with reference to the nozzle being ideally zero, then no fuel
will flow unless air is also flowing, because of the common vacuum
r elation, and fuel flow will increa se with air flow as the vacuum
increases. For such double flow to be truly proportionate and in
constant ratio it is clear that both the liquid and the air flow must
follow similar physical laws and that the weight of each must bear
the same algebraic r elation to the ncuum that is responsible for the
flow. In the absence of a pair of air and fuel passages of such form
and relative disposition as would haye similar flow laws, then some
means of automatic correction of the proportions become necessary
to restore the desired ratio and to maintain it, no matter how the rate
of flow may vary, so as to satisfy the demands of engines operating
at variable speed and load.
Between these two basic processes of carburetion-the "evaporative" and the" proportioning flow "-there may be found a series of
minor alternatives, or special modifications, some of them standing
more or less apart and others lying midway between and involving
both to an equal degree. As an example of the latter a truly evaporative carburetor of the tank and wick type may be modified by
feeding fuel to the wick by a proportionate-flow device instead of
allowing the wick to pick up and feed fuel from the tank by capillarity. Evidently an apparatus of this sort might be classed under
either process. If the proportionate-flow feeder were so regulated
that no fuel accumulated on the wick or in the wick chamber. then
evaporation does not fix the proportion, but the proportionate feeder
does, and the de,-ice is a proportionate-flow carburetor. On the
other hand, if the proportionate-flow feed delivered an excess of
fuel over what could be carried off by the air passing the wick, so~e
fuel would accumulate on or about the wick, and the proportions of
the delivered mixture would be fixed by the enporati"ve and not by
the proportionate-flow elements, and the device would be an evaporative carburetor. Fortunately, such cases as this are rare, or there
would be more confusion than now exi ts. There is generally no
difficulty in interpreting the action of a given apparatus, or, to state
it otherwise, there are very few cases where the basis or principle of
proportionality depends on the rate of feed, the adjustment or other
operating conditions, within the working range.

L

AERONAUTICS.

61

Another sort of mixed process is that of direct injection of fuel
by a pump into the air, the pump being driven by the pulsations of
the air pressure in the intake passage or by the engine directly, and
the delivery of fuel being made into the air on its way to the cylinder through the intake passages or directly into the cylinder after
the air has entered. These are not regarded as proportionate-flow
processes, because in general there is no definite proportion maintained; but also because the air-flow rate is not of itself responsible
for the quantity of fuel fed. If a constant-speed engine cylinder
took the same amount of air every stroke and a pump, dri.'en from
the air pulsations or from the engine, delivered the same amount of
fuel at the same time, then the fuel and air quantities would clearly
be in proportion, fixed by the displacement of the main piston and
pump plunger, r espectively, with corrections for volumetric efficiency.
While this constitutes one series of mechanical proportioning means,
the cases are special, as also is the engine-operati,e condition of
constant speed and load, to which they are applicable. All directinjection engines with or without compressed-air sprays constitute a
quite independent class, characterized by mixture making directly
in the cylinder and have practically nothing in common with the
carburetor class of engines making mixtures externally. Pump deliveries to carbureting chambers in the intake passages, when the
pump is drinn by the engine, or, in fact, in any way except by the
movement of the entering air, are excluded from the proportionateflow class because the flow is not essentially proportionate. They
constitute an additional class between the truly proportionate-flow
and the direct-injection classes.
'When the air flow actuates an air motor equivalent to an air meter
and this motion in turn actuates a fuel pump, then the combination
is truly a proportionate-flow carburetion system, operating on a
constantly metering volume ratio at all rates of air flow, and in all
respects equivalent to the vacuum-controlled flow of the two fluids
through two separate passages to a common point of mixing.
With this general review as a basis, the search for possible forms
and arrangements of parts making up the carburetor proper to
operate under the process of proportioning-flow carburetion may
be undertaken, and all the available suggestions for the construction of proportionate-flow carburetors collected and compared. This
comparative study of the qualitative design of proportioning-flow
carburetors must begin with the collection of examples from any
source, which must then be grouped into t ypical classes on the basis
of functional or structural similarity, so that class may be compared
with class before any attempt is made to analyze differences of
detail within each class.
-The best source of information for this purpose is clearly the
Patent Office record of inventions, and this has accordingly been
made the basis of the study which constitutes the bulk of this report.
From the official classification list and the definitions of each official class and subclass a selection was made of those that seemed
likely to contain patents on carburetors. To assist in this work of
discovering the carburetor patents of the United States the services
of a competent patent lawyer were enlisted, and under his direction
searchers were set to work in the Patent Office, where, aided by its
officials, a list of United States carburetor patents was prepared

62

AERONAUTICS.

and copies collected for study and comparison. The detailed steps
by which this list was made and copies of each patent secured are
given in Part II, with the patent number, date, title, and inventor's
name, arranged according to the official classes, subclasses, and cross
references.
Having secured copies of these patents, which numbered, after
eliminating duplicates, about 3400, a surprisingly large number in
view of the fact that the art is comparatively a new one, every
patent was read and reclassification begun as a basis for the comparative study. The first step in this reclassification divided the
patents into the two groups of "proportioning-flow carburetors"
and" other subjects," the latter including parts, attachments, complete engines, injectors, and all "evaporatiye carburetors." This
made about an equal division and incidentally brought out the interesting fact that practically all the older carburetor patents are
evaporative, while practically all the recent ones are proportioning
flow as to broad process, the latter beO"inning about the year 1900 but
not becoming really numerous until about the year 1910. This shows
that the proportioning-flow carburetor art is about 17 years old,
the official life of a patent, and that, therefore, most modern carburetors fall within the patent life and must be either themselves
the subject of an active patent or similar in some respects to the
disclosures of one or more such patents.
Following this division of United States carburetor patents into
" proportioning-flow" cases and" other subjects" the former group
was restudied for the purpose of subdivision into classes according
to some rational basis of similarity. This step brought out the fact
that the present official classification is not a good one, so deficient
in elements of distinction as to make necessary the creation of a new
classification before any comparative study could be made at all.
This new classification has been worked out and the" proportioningflow" carburetors assigned to places in it in Part III of this report.
The very great labor involved in reading, reclassifying, and comparing these thousands of patents in the limited time available has
probably led to some errors, which can only be removed by a subsequent checking, but it is believed that the results reported are
correct in the main and mistakes are confined to individual cases.
To make this sort of study quite complete and of the utmost practical value, not only to designers but also to patent lawyers interested
in soliciting new patents or in litigations over existing ones, the
new classification and relisting should first be checked and later
extended to include the cases of the leading foreign patent offices.
It is hoped that the value of so doing will seem to parties interested
great enough to have the required funds made available.
Following the reclassification and relisting of the United States
proportioning-flow carburetor patents the general characteristics of
each new class and subclass is given and structural variations within
each class illustrated by photographic reproduction of the drawings
of typical patents, the number of which so reproduced is about 450.
This illustrated review of the functional and structural characteristics of proportioning-flow carburetors is the subject matter of
Part III of this report, which brings out a most amazing wealth of
material as to form and arrangement of parts. Even a brief review
of this section of the work will convince the most skeptical that so

AERONAUTICS.

63

far as qualitative design of proportioning-flow carburetors is concerned there is little to be desired, and that whatever may be lacking
in carburetors or carburetor design is mainly quantitative in character. An effort is made in this comparative study of functional
characteristics of the new classes and subclasses to point out the
most promising ones from the standpoint of automatic proportioning at any rate of flow, so as to stimulate inventive and designing
effort in this direction. Concentration of thought alon~ the more
promising lines should result in greater and more rapId advance
and perfection of the needed applIances than the scattering of the
same effort over the whole field, which includes some types or classes
uf very much less promise. Of course it is hardly to be expected
that there will be a general acceptance of the guides offered, especially among inventors interested in what have been reported as the
less promising groups, as the inventive mind normally resists guidance. However this may be, it is hoped that this, the first systematic
effort to bring some order into what has been a most chaOotic situation, will bear sufficient fruit to justify the serious painstaking labor
that has been expended.
No arrangement of parts intended to act as a proportioning-flow
carburetor can be conceived that does not involve SOome mental
assumption of a law of flow for the fuel and for the air, relating
rate of flow to pressure drop or vacuum. Therefore in everyone
of these many hundreds of patents there is indirectly involved some
such assumption by the inventor, either consciously or unconsciously.
~iVith only a few isolated exceptions, not one of them gives any inkling of what flow law is assumed to hold in his device, although
nearly all assert their object to be the production of a device that
either holds the proportions constant under all conditions or gives
some specific sort of control over proportions. In some cases it is
quite clear that there is no understanding of the general principles
of flllid flOow at all, while in others the prmciples have clearly served
to guide the design which, therefOore, is at least qualitatively correct and requires only the application of the numerical values in the
flow equations to its dimensions to be quantitatively correct also
or which can be made correct experimentally without solving the
equations numerically. One pretty commOn violation of the principles of flow for air is neglect of its critical pressure drOop limit,
according to which no increase of ajr flow through an orifice takes
place after the pressure drOop through it exceeds a given value somewhere about four-tenths of the absolute pressure on the supply side.
This becomes a most serious interference with proportionalIty when
it is remembered that it does not apply to the liquid' orifice acted
upon by a similar pressure drop, so that however regularly the air
and fuel may increase together as pressure drop increases from zero
there comes a time when the air flow ceases to increase while the
fuel goes on. Other violations of a general character include the
implied assumption of a constant coefficient of efflux for both fuel
and air orifices, which may actually vary 100 per cent, also neglect
of the differences between capillary and orifice types of fuel passages and the effect of the pressure drop itself on the law Oof flow
for a cri ven passage.
WitTlOut undertaking any new experimental determinations of
the flow laws and their coefficients for air and gasoline in passages

64

ABRONAUTICS.

of the forms and size appropriate to carburetors, it is important
that the known principles and facts on the subject be reviewed for
two reasons, first to indicate the extent of the justification for the
implied assumption of some sort of flow law in all of these inventions, and second to clear the way for such new experimental determinations as may be necessary for undertaking their quantitative
design on a natural ba is. This review of existing flow laws and
flow data forms the subject matter of P art V of this report and
proves beyond question that pre ent knowledge is wholly inadequate,
and that new experimental determinations must be made just as soon
as possible.
Discussion and argument can never be as convincing as pro\ed
facts. On the question of proportionality in engine carburetors, no
amount of rea oning as to why one of them should or should not 1 e
characterized by constant proportions as flow rate changes, can equal
in value an experimental determination. For this reason 10 of the
leading American carburetors were secured by loan from their makers
with the assistance of the Automobile Chamber of Commerce, and
were subject to tests for proportionality of air to fuel over a wide
range of flow rates. The methods and apparatus used, together with
the results obtained, are given in Part VI, the la t section of this
report. "'While, as had been expected no one of them was able to
keep the proportions constant, as the rate of flow was varied either
by throttle position at a constant engine speed or by engine speed at
a constant throttle position, yet the actua l or possible approach to
constancy for the whole group is wonderfully good, considering the
absence of exact flow law data and the fact that practically all are
products of cut and try or empiric design, as di tinguished from the
rational or scientific. In some ca es the results are so very good
as to lead to the belief that substantial constancy within a few per
cent of actual constancy of proportions of air to fuel is within reach
and will be generally obtainable in carburetors of considerable variety
as to form, as soon as flow law data becomes available to desjgners.
Furthermore, should it appear after a series of engine tests on different mixtures that constancy of proportions is not desirable, but that
a certain rate of leaning or enriching is desirable as load or speed
varies, there is equal promise that it can be obtained. In short, there
is every reason to belie\e that the period of pure invention where
wondering, guessing, and assuming constitute the only guides, a
period t ypical of the youth of any new art, is about to give way to
the second and permanent stage of designing where proved facts
and authentic data form the basis of practice. Such a situation can
be most quickly brought about by making the experimental determinations recommended in the" Conclusions," and giving the results
the widest possible publicity.
While proportionality control is the prime consideration in any
carburetor, it is not in itself sufficient to make a good carburetor,
and while proportionality must be controlled through suitable arrangements of properly formed and dimensioned parts based on
established flow laws, there are certain other structural elements
necessary to a practical carburetor. Finally there is reason to believe that there must be some elements of carburetor design concerned with adaptability to a given engine or to definite operating

AEROKA UTICS.

65

conditions of a given engine or to a given fuel that may not be
brought out by confining the study to proportions alone, or to steady
flow alone, or even to any particular sort of pulsating flow. These
are all matters worthy of careful consideration, but somewhat intangible and elusive in character, certainly at the present time.
Partly for this reason and partly because all the time available has
been consumed in reaching the point here reported, these matters
or the items concerned with them can not be given more than a brief
notice, which is included so that they be not forgotten or their importance minimized.
,
N e~'t to proportionality control in basic importance in mixture
making comes mixture quality defined by wetness, superheat and
pressure, or in general by its physical condition. Other things being
equal, mixtures haying higher absolute pressures in the intake passages should develop melln effectiye pressures that are directly propOl'tional to the absolute pressures, and this is ::t matter of considerable inlportance in aero engines or others where least weight per
horsepower is a prime factor. Some classes of carburetors present
fixed areas of air and mixture passages for the flow, while others
increase the area as flow rate increases, and therefore should be capable of developing higher mean effective pressures and more power
in a given engine unless some other variable or factor neutralizes
this possibility. The importance of this mixture pressure factor in
mixture density is recognized in some of the patents which disclose
fans or blowers driven from the engine and placed either before the
carburetor or between it and the engine. This arrangement seems
to have some possibilities worth investigating, because the power to
pump the charge is far less than the promise of increased engine output, though of course there must be a decrease of thermal efficiency.
Adding to such blowers or fans a barometric type of control of
delivery pressure would seem to offer a means of neutralizing the
effect of altitude on engine power which with aero engines may be
considerable.
Such moving parts as fan rotors in the path of the mixtUire make
excellent mixers or mixture homogenizers, and homogeneity of mixture is a matter of coordinate importance with proportionality
and density. While ,yith the small passages suited to small engines,
a stream of gaseous fuel or of yery light gasoline may be relied upon
to automatically mix with the air and produce a reasonably homogeneous mixture by the action of the header and valve pocket eddy
currents alone. This is not true with heavy gasolines that can
only partially vaporize in air at atmospheric temperature, nor is it
true with large engines developing several hundred horsepower in
a single unit. The heavier the fuel and the larger the intake passage, the more important becomes the matter of specific mixing or
homogenizing means L.'wolving either fixed or rotating parts. Any
unvaporized liquid fuel must be 9istTibuted as uniformly as possible
through the air in the form of the finest possible fog, and heavy
drops or wall streams of liquid must be elimmated if any good effect
of proper proportionality control is to be secured.
As an alternative to such stirrers or fine spray fog distributors
of unvaporized fuel through the air, the mixture may be heated to
remove the liquid, or a light easily vapo['izable fuel may be subst;.72805°-S. Doc. 55!), 64-2--5

66

AERONAUTICS.

tuted for the heavy. At the present time, in the absence of exact
data on the effects of any liquid in the mixture as to degree, and
relying on the established fact that much liquid not specially treated
with reference to fog making and air mixing produces very bad combustion, it is recommended that for aero use at least nothing but
the lighter gasolines of 76 ° Baume or bette,r be used. Some of this
grade of gasoline was obtained for the J?urpose of proportionality
tests from the American Oil Works of TItusville, Pa., and its superior vaporization oyer the common fuel gasoline of the market is
proyed by the larger drop in temperature observed and reported
in the tests as the mixture formed in the carbU!retor. While such
gasoline brings a higher price than the common heavy grade, the
excess is not very much considering the superior vaporizmg q.ualities,
and such differences in cost as exist alI'e matters of negligible importance for military aero work on this oil-producing country.
The mixture heating alternative to using sufficiently light grades
of gasoline for making homogeneous dry miA'iures or to spraying
means of distributing unvaporized liquid through wet mixtures is
one that requires exact experimental tests to determine its comparative value. It is of importance only with heavy fuels carrying constituents that will not vaporize without more heat than can be derived
from atmospheric air. While heaters for such mixtures are now
available, it is not possible to say whether it is better fOlI' a given
engine to use wet mixtures with stirrers OII' fog distributors or to dry
them by heat, starting with heavy fuel; or to do neither, but, on the
other hand, substitute light fuel. Of course, in the absence of a
limit to supply and cost, the last is clearly the wise course. Any
heating of the mixture decreases its density just as does a reduction
of pressure, so heating must not be resorted to unless the gain from
its nse exceeds the value of the power lost, and this gain is almost
exclusively a gain in thermal efficiency due to better combustion,
with a corresponding improvement in lubrication and interior fouling
conditions over wet, cold mixtures. J 0 bette/l' proof of the situation
is available than the two related established facts (a) that maximum
power and maximum efficiency are not simultaneously obtainable
with any but dry mixtures, and (b) that the carbon monoxide and
the free oxygen in the exhaust can not both be brought to zero at the
same time, except with dry mixtures. If therefore heavy fuels must
be used, which does not seem to be the case for aero sel"'lice, it is
necessary to experimentally determine the best degree of wetness for
both power and efficiency, and the comparative engine performance
with dry mixtures made dl y by mixture heaters. These are matters
r
of coordinate importan'ce with proportionality for which similar
data are required to establish the allowable or required range from
constancy if there is any at all for best all-round engine performance. Taken together the lI'esults of such tests should lead to the
establislunent of specification for mixtures best suited for a given
engine with the same sort of precision that is now in general use in
the steam and vacuum specifications for steam turbines. Given such
mixture specifications and the suitable basic scientific data on carburetor phenomena, the carburetor designer may then follow the
same general methods used by the designer of steam boilers or
condensers.

AEROKAUTICS.

67

As to proportionality itself, it must be assumed, pending experimental proof to the contrary, that engines require mixtures in constant proportions because of the chemical nature of the reaction and
the thermodynamic requirement that maximum power and efficiency
should result from mixtures leaving no unburned fuel and having
the highest calorific power per pound of mixture. While among
carburetor and engine men there may be found opinions that under
this or that condition the mixture must be rich, it is also true that
air measurements are practically unlmown among them, and therefore the proportions can not be 1mown. Many such cases investigated have led to the conclusion that the meaning intended is rather
that the mixture must be made richer than it was or than at other
times and not that it must depart from actual constancy.
There are some subsidiary problems of carburetor design worthy
of notice, even though time is not available for their investigation
at this time. The first group of these includes the several effects of
differences in the inertia of air and gasoline, the engine-operating
conditions that bring them into action, and the corrective means to
be introduced to meet interferences with proper engine working.
No matter how many cylinders there may be nor how high the speed,
the flow through the passages of a carburetor and through the intake
header between it and the inlet valve ports is not a steady but a pulsating flow . There is throughout the mixture making and supply
system a series of more or less irregular pressure and velocity waves,
and there must be some reflections, returns, and synchronizmg heat
phenomena. Practically nothing is 1mown of these conditions except that they exist and that should the pulsations vary in amplitude
or periodicity bad effects must follow, because in such a case the
difference between the inertia of air and gasoline passing through
its carburetor feed passages or passing through the mamfold passages beyond the carburetor must cause a lag of flow, positive acceleration producing a fuel lag and negative acceleration an air lag_
The natural period of oscillation of the fuel in its float chamber and
feed passage may synchronize in beats with the mixture pulsations,
producing periodic proportionality changes, and the surging speed
fluctuations observed in some engines operating on wide-open
throttle with a steady lead may be traced to such sources.
Any sudden change of flow rate in the carburetor, whether produced by a quick throttle movement or by a change of lead torque
without a throttle movement, must produce mixture proportionality
changes by inertia, which, even though momentary, may yet last
long enough to seriously interfere with operation or even stop the
engine under lead and thereby condemn as unserviceable an otherwise perfectly good carburetor. A sudden increase of flow rate will
tend to produce a lean mixture, because the liquid fuel accelerates
more slowly than the air, while a sudden decrease of flow rate produces the reverse action, the mixture enriching and in some cases
the liquid flow continuing after air flow has stopped enough to
visibly spill fuel. Normally such actions as these are most commonly produced by quick movements of the throttle, by means of
which the flow rate may be changed in a fraction of a second from
practically zero to a very high maximum of several hundred feet
per second. Throttle closure is not so serious as throttle opening,

68

AERONAUTICS.

because mixtures momentarily become rich instead of lean and do
ignite even when very rich, because also in extreme cases of sudden
complete closure the main fuel jet, which is tending to make the
mixture overrich, is thrown completely out of action in many modern
designs, a low speed or idling jet being brought into action as an
alternate. It is on quick throttling opening, suddenly demanding
more power, that greatest difficulty arises, because then the mixture
naturally tends to become lean by mertia, and, having so low a flame
propagative rate, produces back-fires or completely misses fire in
extreme cases, the least evil effect being a lag in acceleration of the
engine. This has been met by the introductIOn of the accelerating
cup, many forms and connections of "hich are illustrated in this
report, some used in connection with idling jets and others independent. The accelerating cup, so called, is a small chamber, usually
shunt connected to the main fuel passage and between the jet and
float chamber, so arranged that it fills on slow, steady running and
empties through the main or through a separate nozzle whenever
the acceleration conditions tend to make the flow through the regular
fuel channels insufficient, the fuel from the cup being added to compensate for the momentary main jet leanness. "While the accelerating
cup is the present solution of leanness due to inertia developed on
accelerating the flow and the idling jet is in one sense the equivalent
for a decreased flow, the latter also serves another useful function,
that of relieving the main passages of the requirement of maintaining proportionality over the lo"est ranges of flow rates, and both
are comparatively recent developments in this carburetor field, at
least so far as adoption and use are concerned.
It is well to point out here that neither the idling jet nor the
accelerating cup must be confused with the lifting tube, "hich is
perhaps a still more recent development forced into use by heavy
fuels which resist vaporization and "hich at low flow rates will not
rise with the air in the mixing passages, because the air velocity is
not great enough to overcome the gravity of the liquid. The lifting
tube is a small passage in parallel with the main one, and either a
part of it or quite separate, through which the velocity is always
great enough to lift the fuel no matter what the flow rate or throttle
position, and at high flow rates the lifting tube may remain in action
or go out. In any case the fuel passing up the lifting tube has come
from the main and not from a separate fuel nozzle, as is the case with
the idling passages.
Liquid inertia versus that of air or vapor also plays a part in the
mixture-distributing header or intake manifold between the carburetor and the several inlet-valve ports whenever any unvaporized
liquid is present. This liquid will not turn at bends in the same proportionate way as does the gaseous constituents, but the walls will
act like separators, tending to collect the liquid in streams, which
run along the surfaces where the mixture velocity is least. Therefore
header design has become a part of the problem of carburetor de,
sign since heavy gasolines began to replace the old and once universally used light ones.
Another group of subsidiary design problems is concerned with
the supply of liquid to the metering nozzles and invoh-es the fuel
passages, the float chamber, float, and float valve, and their design

AERONAUTICS.

69

with reference to tilting 01' vibration on the one hand and to clogging of small passages with dirt or gum on the other. While all
carburetors are not provided with float chambers, some having o,erflow chambers especially for stationary large tractor use and a few
ha,ing diaphragm chambers or pressure feeds without any fixed
leyel auxiliary chamber at all, it is nevertheless a fact that practically all carburetors used in transportation work have constant-le,el
chambers, float-valve controlled, from which the metering fuel nozzle
takes its supply. Both the designer of the carburetor and the user
of the instrument assume that the passages through which the flow
is to take place have a definite area and that the level in the float
chamber is at a definite distance below the fuel-nozzle tip. Should
the fuel passages become clogged with solid matter, due to a failm-e
to properly filter the fuel or clean out a loaded filter member or with
gumming matter that is now found occasionally to collect from the
fuel itself, it is clear that all calculations and experimental perfection have suddenly been rendered useless. It is not sufficient to assume that these things will not happen, but eyery carburetor should
be so constructed as to make it easy to clean out any of its passages and without requiring the poking of wires into delicately
adjusted fine metering orifices, so that their area is changed and the
original proportionality destroyed. For the same reason any fuel
nlYes mu t be so designed that battering or wearing of the seat or
valye is either impossible or immaterial so far t,S proportionality
is concerned.
Perhaps as common and serious a mechanical interference with
proportionality as any is the yariations in float chamber leyel normally assumed to be constant but just as often not. It is easily possible for the leyel to change as much or more than the head producing the fuel flow at low flow rates, and if it does there must follow
a variation of proportions of a hundred per cent. Fortunately at the
normal wor1.'ing flow rates the possible variation in float chamber
leyel is a negligible fraction of the fuel flow head in most carburetors, but in some of them, those in which the vacuum increases
least with flow rate, the effect is more serious, and as there are carburetors that produce the most dense mixtures the matter is one
of importance. Aside from leaky float ,ahes, or val,es of insufficient size, or valves operated with improper linkage to the floats, or
haying list motion in the linkage, all of which may be responsible
for changes of leyel that should not be permitted, and all of which
are easily removable by good mechanical design once they are recognized, there are some operatin~ conditions that caUSe trouble of a
deeper seated kind more diffiCUlt to remo,e. These are tilting and
vibration, both of which are apt to be exaggerated to the limit in
aerO engines. In any but an annular float chamber having the metering nozzle at the center, tilting changes the hydraulic head on the
nozzle and when the flow inducing vacmIDl is small at the nozzle
tip, this change of head by tilting may be an appreciable part of the
whole flow head and proportionality destroyed. This would seem to
be an argument in favor of the annular over the side-connected float
chamber ~nd important in proportion as the vacuum at the fuel nozzle is low, though negligible when it is high, but for high capacity
light-weight engines the low vacuum has much in its favor as a

70

AERONAUTICS.

means of securing high density mixtures. However, the matter of
float chamber form and position may be settled with reference to
tilting there remains the vibration interference. Perfectly good carburetors have been observed to overflow their float chambers and
spill as much gasoline as they used when vibrating under the shaking influence of the engine at some particular engine speed which
seemed to synchronize with the natural period of oscillation of either
the float itself or the free liquid in the chamber. J 0 adequate remedy
for this seems to be available nor for the overflow and spilling from
an excessively tilted chamber, whether concentric or side attached,
but it seems clear that this is a mechanical problem worthy of study)
the design of constant level chambers that really maintain the level
do not spill, in spite of tilting to any angle met in service even abnormally, and quite independent of any vibration.

REPORT No. 11.
PART II.
By

CHARLES

E.

LUCKE.

CARBURETOR PATENTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
As the most fruitful source of information, copies of all patents
on carburetors listed in the United States Patent Office have been
collected and later reclassified for comparative study. The location
of these patents being a difficult matter, in view of the present
official classification, the services of a patent attorney, Mr. A. L. Kent,
of New York City, were enlisted, and under his direction the search
was conducted, lists for the various subclasses prepared, and copies
of each one, after eliminating duplicates, secured.
As a first step the following definition of what was wanted was
submitted to Mr. Kent as a guide in his work:
For the purpose of this inquiry a carburetor may be defined as an appliance
to be attached to an internal-combustion engine, adapted to receive air and
liquid fuel, and to deliver to the engine an explosive mixture.
By this definition all appliances that are not distinctly attachments are excluded, but there is inclucled everything that makes an explosive mixture from
liquid fuel and air when attached to the suction or intake port of an internalcombustion engine. 1\1ore particularly are we concerned, though by no means
exclusively, with that group of carburetor appliances in Which the suction of
the engine through some passage produces a r eduction of pressure at a given
point and induces a flow of gasoline by reason of that reduced pressure. This
class is often described as the jet carburetor, vacuum jet, suction spray, etc.
Tllis is the class in common use on present automobiles, motor boats, aeroplanes, tractors, railroad gasoline cars and locomotives, and a considerable
number of gasoline stationary engines.

The foregoing was later supplemented by more specific instructions
to disregard internal vaporizing devices; that is, those in which the
fuel is vaporized in the engine cylinder or in a combustion chamber,
includin& devices in which the fuel liquid is sprayed into the cylinder
without being previously mixed with air, and devices in which a
pump supplies the fuel liquid unmixed with ail' to the cylinder or
other combusion chamber; and to list devices in which the fuel liquid
enters the cylinder or combustion chamber as a vapor, including
those in which the liquid is externally vaporized but internally mixed
with a part or all of the air, devices in which a pump supplies the
liquid to a charge-forming device, and carburetors and parts and
attachments for operating with kerosene and other comparatively
heavy oils.
With this information, the procedure followed is given by Mr.
Kent, as follows:
I first went over with you the definition of subcla ses in the two classes of
the Patent Office Classification of Patents which at the time contained most
of the carburetor patents; that is, class 48, gas, heating, and illuminating; and
71

72

AERONAUTICS.

cla,;s 123, internal-combustion engines; and tile following subclasses "ere selected to be ordered complete, namely :
In class 48: Subcla ses 144, 145, Ho, 148, 149, 150, 150.1, 150.2, 150.3, 151, 152,
153, 154, 154.1, 155, 155.1, 155.2, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168, 169, ancl 219.
In class 123: Subclasses 119, 121, 131, and 132.
In order to be sure of getting all tile patents in these subclasses, and also
copies of patents cros -referenced into these subclasses from other subclasses,
I had copies made of the subclass li ts in the Publications Division of the
Patent Office and then had these Ii ·ts checked and completed from the bundles
of patents in the Patent Office search room; and for each subclass I bad the
cross-reference patents in the bundles in the search room Ii ted and then had
these cross-reference patent lists cbecked and completed from cross-reference
lists in the CIa sification Diyision of the Patent Office. The patents in the
aboye subcla ses were then ordered from these lists, excepting the crossreference patents, and a single Ii ·t of cro. s-reference patents from the several
subclasses was made up, eliminating dnplicates, and the patents on such li t
"ere also ordered.
These patents, about 3,500 in al1 , including several hundred of the cros. reference patents which were duplicates of patents belonging to the subcla ses
and which are omitted from list No. 2 above referred to, were, through the
courtesy of the Commi ioner of Patents, furnished by the Patent Office without
charge after the purpose for \\'hich they were wanted by you was explained to
the commi 'sionel', and ,yith the understanding that they were to be obtained
only for such use.
I also had the following subclasses in class 123 and various other classes
searched or examined for the purpose of selecting carburetor patents such as
you "ere interested in :
Class 60 : Subclasses 4, 28, 36, and 37 (searched) .
Class 67: Various subclasses (examined) .
Class 103: Subclasses 67, 7 , 79, and 84 (searched) .
Class 115: Subclass 13 (searched).
Class 122: Subclas 24 (searched) .
Clas 123 : Subclas es 3, 4, 7 to 18, 20, 21, 22, 25 to 29, 34 to 59, 62 to 60, 71,
73, 75, 76, 78, 79, 82, 92, 97 to 106, 108, 110 to 118, 122 to 130, 133 to 142, 180, and
191 (all except a few searched, and a number of other subclasses looked into) .
Class 126: Subclasses 249 an1251 (searched).
Class 158: Subclas es 36 to 73 ( ear ched) .
Class 160: All three subclasses (examined) .
Class 162: All three subcla 'es (examined) .
Class 230: Subclass 13 (searched) .
Class 236: All subclasses (examined).
Class 257: Subclass 52 (searched) .
Class 261: All subclas es ( earched).
Most of the aboye subclasses y\,ere searched through, each patent being looked
at. Some subcla ses were only e amined, or looked into, sufficiently to decide
that they contained DO patents of interest. In class 123, patents listed from
subclass 29, oil engines, pump supply to ai l' inlet, two cycle, were not ord ered
or included in Ii ts furnished to ;)·ou, as they were Similar in the carburetors
shown to patents ordered from subclass 28, oil engines, pump supply to air
inlet, four cycle, which I understood from you were not of interest to you .
Searching the aboye subclasses resultert in the listing of some 2,500 patents,
substantially all from classes 123 and 261. From these lists patents contained
in the lists of subclasses ordered complete and their cross-reference patents
were stricken off and only those remaining were ordered and listed in the
lists which I am furnishing you of the searched subclasses.
As I have already explained to you, cIa s 261, gas and liquid contact apparatus, is a new class which, although established some time ago with three
01' four subclasses, has just. recently anad since the patents in subcla . es ordered for you complete ,,,ere obtained, been revised and expanded to include,
in 126 subclasses, carburetors and other gas and liquid contact apparatus
selected from 'l'urious cIa ses in which such apparatus might be found. The
official definition of this class is :
"Apparatus especially adapted to produce an intimate contact bet'''eE'n
gases and liquids to exchange properties or mutually modify conditions.
"NOTE.-This class includes devices generally known as air and gas wa hers,
air mOisteners, carburetors, carbonators, jet condensers, coolers, heater s, and the
like, operating by direct contact of the two fluids."

-

-

- -- -- - - - --

- - -- - - --

AERONAUTICS.

- -- - - -

-

73

At the time the new subclasses in this class were established, a number of
subclasses in other classes were abolished, including the following subclasses
in class 48, which were listed and ordere(1 for you as above explained, viz, subclasses 145, 146, 148, 149, 150, ] 50.1, 150.2, 150.3, 151, 152, 153, 154, 154.1, 155,
155.1, 155.2, 156, 157, 158, 159, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, and 169. Many of
the patents from these abolished subclasses of class 48 were transferred to the
newly established subclasses of class 261. In searching the subclasses of class
261, a large number of the patents in the subclasses of class 48 ordered complete were found and listed, but have been omitted from the list fUl"nished you
of patents found in this class to avoid duplication, as above explained.
I think that you have received :1 fairly complete set of carburetor patents of
the kind in which you were interested, but further examination and search
would undoubtedly result in adding a more or less considerable number of
patents, although the Patent i()ffice system of cross-referencing patents from
one subclass to another makes it quite possible that the number of patents
missed may be comparatively small.

•

Such patents in these lists as were found after examination to be
proportioning carburetor cases have been marked with an asterisk
[*J. These cases have been reclassified in accordance "ith the definition of the succeeding sections of this report, Part III, and they
furnish material to illustrate the discussion of the characteristics
of each of the new classes and subclasse~, as reported in Part IV of
this report.
The lists of carburetor patents here reported include :
List No. l.-Patents in the subclasses ordered complete, arranged
according to classes and subclasses, and giving number, date, inventor's name, and title of each patent belonging in each of the seyeral
subclas es, and the numbers only of patents assigned as cross-reference patents to each subclass.
List No. 2.- Cross-reference patents from list No.1, with patents
belonging in, or regularly assigned to, the subclas. es of list No.1
omitted.
List No. 3.-Selected patents from searched subclasses arranged
according to class and subclass, with patents which appear in the
previous lists omitted.
List No. 4.- Selected cross-reference patents :from the searched
subclasses, with patents which appear in either of the three previous
lists omitted.
A. List of subclasses of the United States Patent Office Classification of Patents which were ordered complete or searched for carburetor patents, giving the official class and subclass numbers and
titles of subclasses ordered complete, and class numbers and titles
and subclass numbers of subclas es searched:
1. Subclasses ordered complete.
2. Subclasses searched or examined.
B. Lists of United States patents obtained and examined:
List No. 1.-Patents in the subclasses ordered complete, arranged
according to classes and subclasses, and giying number, date, inventor's name, and title of each patent belonging in each of the
several subclasses, and the numbers only of patents assigned as crossreference patents to each subclass .
List No. 2.-Cross-reference patents from list No.1, with patents
belonging in, or r egularly assigned to, the subclasses of list No. 1
omitted.
List No. 3.-Selected patents from searched subclasses arranged
according to class and subclass, with patents which appear in the
previous lists omitted.

-

- - - - - --

74

AERONAUTICS.

List No. 4.-Selected cross-reference patents from the searched
subclasses, with patents which appear in either of the three previous
lists omitted.

A.

LIST OF SUBCLASSES OF THE UNITED STATES PATENT OFFICE CLA SIFICATION 0]<' PATENTS WHICH WERE ORDERED COMPLETE OR SEARCHED
FOR CARBURETOR PATENTS, GIVING THE OFFICIAL C LASS AND SUB CLASS NUMBERS A 'D TITLES OF SUBCLASSES ORDERED CO~IPLE'I.'E, AND
CLASS NUMBERS AND TITLES AND SUBCLASS NUMBERS OF SUBCLAS ES
SEARCHED.

1. Subclasses ordered complete:
Class 48, gas, heating and illuminatingSubclass 144, carburetors.
Subcla ·s 145, carburetors, regulating.
Subclass 146, carburetors, series.
Subclass 148, carburetors, heater.
Subclass 149, carburetors, heater, air.
Subcla s 150, carburetors, oil-feed.
Subclass 150.1, carburetors, oil-feed, multiple-supply.
Subclass 150.2, dU'buretors, oil-feed, multiple-jet.
Subcla s 150.3, carburetors, oil-feed, multiple-jet, progressive.
Subcla s 151, carbjlretors, oil-feed, float-valves.
Subcla s 152, carburetors, oil-feed, pump.
Subclass 153, carburetors, oil-feec1, rotary.
Subcla s 154, carburetor, oil-feed, spray.
Subclass 154.1, carburetors, oil-feed, suction-controlled valve.
Subclass 155, carburetors, atomizers.
Subcla s 155.1, carburetors, atomizers, con tant-Ievel.
Subcla s 155.2, carburetors, atomizers, con tant-Ievel, automatic-dilution.
Subclass 156, carburetors, capillary.
Subclass 157, carburetors, capillary, piral-pas age.
Subclass 158, carburetors, capillary, vertical-screen.
Subclass 159, carburetor, capillary, zigzag-passage.
Subclas' 160, carburetors, gravity.
Subcla s 163, carburetors, 0 motic.
Subclass 164, carburetors, pivoted.
Subclas 165, carburetors, pi'l'oted, revolving.
Subclass 166, carburetor , submerged-blast.
Subclass 167, carburetors, submerged-blast, coil.
Subcla s 168, carburetors, surface.
Subclas. 169, carburetors, ul'face, float.
Subcla 219, proce ses, carbureting.
Class 123, internal-combustion enginesSubclass 119, charge-forming devices.
Subclass 121, charge-forming devices, combined oil and gas.
Subclass 131, charge-forming device, atomizers.
Subcla s 132, charge-forming devices, atomizer s, constant-level.
2. S1lbclasses searched or examined :

Class 60, miscellaneous heat-engine plantsSubclasses 4, 28, 36, and 37 (searched).
Class 67, illuminating burners.
Various subclasses examined.
Class 103. pump Subclas es 67, 78, 79, and 84 (searched).
Class 115, marine propulsionSubclass 13 (searched).
Class 122, liquid heater and vaporizersSubclass 24 (searched).
Class 123, internal-combustion eng-inesSubclas e 3, 4, 7 to 18, 20, 21, 22, 25 to 29, 34 to 59, 62 to 69, 71, 73,
75, 76, 78, 79, 82. 92, 97 to 106, 108, 110 to 118, 122 to 130, 133 to 142,
180, and 191 (all except a few searched)-

AERONAUTICS.

75

2. S1tbclas8es searched or examined-Contilllied.

CIa s 126, stoves and furnacesSubclasses 249 and 251 (searched).
Class 158, liquid and gasoeo us fuel burnersSubclas es 36 and 73 (searched).
Class 160, stearn and vacuum pumpsAll three subclas es examined.
Class 162, injecto['s and ejecto['sAll three subclasses examined.
Class 230, air and ga pumpsSubclass 13 (searched).
Class 236. dampers, automaticAll subclas es examined.
Class 257, heat exchangeSubclass 52 (searched).
Class 261, gas and liquid contact apparatusAll subclasses searched.

B.

LISTS OF UNITED STATES PATENTS OBTAI "ED AND EXAMINED.
LIST No.

1.

PATENTS IN THE SUBCLASSES ORDERED COMPLETE, ARRANGED ACCORDI"G TO
CLASSES AND SUBCLASSES, AND GIVING
UMBER, DATE, INVENTOR' NAME, AND
TITLE OF EaCH lATENT BELO ' GING IN EACH OF THE SEVEllA!. SUBCLASSES, AND
THE N UMBERS ONLY OF PATENTS ASSIGNED AS CRoss·REFERENCE PATENTS TO
EACH SUBCLASS.

CLASS 123, INTERNAL·COMBUSTION ENGINES.
SUBCLASS llD, CHARGE· FORMING DEVICES .

302,478. July 22, 1 84. Gaume. Ga engine.
396,925. Oct. 21, 1884. Hopkins. Gas engine.
345,596. July 13, 1 6. Lenoir. Gas engine.
367,937. Aug. 9, 1887. Shaw. Combined ga and oil engine.
407,998. July 30, 1889. Deboutteville & l\Ialandin. Apparatus for carbureting
air.
430,235. June 17, 1890. Ritchey, Preparation of gas for gas engines.
517,077. Mar. 27, 1 94. Thayer. Gas engine.
566,263. Aug. 18, 1896. Wolf. Gas or petroleum engine or motor.
632,509. Sept. 5, 1 99. Ayres. Carbureting device for gas or explosive engines.
638.655. Dec. 5, 1899. Taylor. Coupling ga motors and gas producers.
644,922. Mar. 6, 1900. Johnson & Gillooly. Carbureter.
657,662. Se.pt. 11, 1900. La Roche. ContrOlling means for explosi,e engines.
663,549. Dec. 11, 1900. Mathieu. Carburetor.
673,123. Apr. 30, 1901. Henderson. Carburetor.
*680,115. Aug. 6, 1901. Blomstrom. Vaporizer for internal·combustion engines.
*688,349. Dec. 10, 1901.
cott & Bonney. Vaporizing device for explosive en·
gines.
696,909. Apr. 1, 1902. McCormick & Miller. Carbureting device for explosive
engine .
784.699. Mar. 14, 1905. Pederson & Anderson. Feed valve for gasoline engines.
7 9,321. May 9, 1905. Gerdes. Means for regulating the air feed to gas
motors.
*806,434. Dec. 5, 1905. Schebler. Carburetol' for hydrocarbon motors.
* 06. 22. Dec. 12, 1905. Millard. Carburetor.
868,834. Oct. 22, 1907. Bassford. Explosive engine.
881,803. Mar. 10, 190. Jaubert. Propulsion of ubmarine boats.
* 97,259. Aug. 25, 1908. Winton & Anderson . Method of carbureting air for
explosive engines.
924,926. June 15, 1909. Parker. Muffler for mixers.
930,596. Aug. 10, 1909. Hanks. Carburetor jacket or casing.

76

AERONAUTICS.

971,971. Oct. 4, 1910. Cassedy & Purser. Charge-forming de,ice for internalcombustion engines.
973.11. Oct. 18, 1910. Stockton. Gas engine.
1,006,B09. Oct. 24, 1911.
Irich & Rahr. Carburetor for internal-combustion
engines.
1,01B,447. Feb. 27, 1912. Schenck. Valve mechanism.
1,021,079. Mar. 26, 1912. Stewart. lIlixing attachment for carburetors.
1,022,027. Apr. 2, 1912. Hyde & Gage. Hydrocarbon engine.
1,037,953. Sept. 10, 1912. Michener. Internal-combu tion engine.
] ,051,690. Jan. 2B, 1913. Colwell. In ternal-combustion engiue.
1,075,051. Sept. 9, 1913. Kendall. Controlling device for in ternal-combustion
engine '.
1,09G.901. May 19,1914. Freschal & Freschal. Motor fuel-supplying apparatus.
1.09B,164. May 26, 1914. Mooney. Auxilian' gas generator for engines.
1.105,592. July 2B, 1914. Bas forel. Explosiye engine.
*1,10;3,687. Au"'. 4, 1914. Ottawa. Carburetor.
~1, 112, 257 .
Sept. 29, 1914. Brush. Mixture- upplying apparatus for internalcombustion engines.
] ,121,137. Dec. 15, 1914. Schoonmaker. Internal-combu tion engine.
1,123,114. Dec. 29, 1914. Di Ill. lIleans for moistening the air useel in
explosion engines.
1,128,830. Feb. 16, 1915. Wharton. E.conomizer fo r internal-combustion
engines.
1,138,581. May 4, 1915. Shumaker. Charrre-formin g de,ice fo r in ternalcombustion engine:=:.
1,150,:')62. Aug. 17, 1915. ,"ose. ElectricaJJ~' - control1ed yaporizer for internalcombustion engine:=:.
1,152,0 0. Aug. 31, 1915. Denney & Osborn . Air-supplying attachment for
carbur etor '.
1.170,788. Feb. B, 1916. Walch. :\Iixing device.
C1"OSS 1'e[e1"en06 patents, class 128, subclas8 119.

240,994
275,238
2 6,030
370,258
376,638
38:-,121
421,474
450,091

497,046
505,767
552,312
563,548
564,155
564,769
592,794
593,034

602,820
623,190
623,361
627,359
632.888
633,014
657,140
660,482

673,138
692,071
745,055
747,190
775,859
790,325
806,125
812,860

SUBCLASS 121, CHARGE FORlII:\G DEVICES,

855,191
857,980
86 ,2 1
883,240
895,222
913,121
926,756
946,737
co~rBINED

965,632
1,013,955
1,030,388
1,038,300
1,054,205
1,066,391
1,099,445
1,109,192

1,120,828
1,158,179

OIL AND GAS.

*574,183. Dec. 29, 1896. "Gnder'.\ooc1. :Jlixer fo r gas engines.
*658.59J.
ept. 25, ] 900. Shal'tle & :\filler. Gas engine.
"679,053. July 23, 1901. Johnston . Yaporizer for e~"plo i,e eugines.
*792.894. June 20, 1905. Greell. Oil or ga"Oline attachment for gas engines.
974.255. No,. I, 1910. Galusha. Power plant.
1,112,188. Sept. 2fl, 1914. At,,·ood. Compound incluction nl.lve for internalcombustion engines.
CrOSS-1'eterence patents, olass 123, s11/Jol a88 121.

550,675
403,367

555,373
c:55,T17

585.115
587,627

613,757
632,859

64:'),044
679,3 0

753,510

1 ,021,079

909,558

SUBCLASS 131, CHARGE FORlI DEYICES, ATO:llIZERS.

*695.060. l\Iar. 11, 1902. Krastin. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
855,191. May 28, 1907. Lo\". Hydrocarbon motor.
'" 56,638. June 11, 1907. Biggin, jr., Carburetol·.
857,566. June 18, 1907. Franchetti. AtomiZing pray nozzle.
*B58,586. July 2, 1907. Duryea. Means for supplying explosive vapors fo r operating rock drills.

77

AERO N AUTICS.

883,981. Apr. 7, 1908. Shanck. Gas generator for explosive engines.
886,513. May 5, 1008. J ohnston. Fuel spray for internal-combustion motors.
924,044. June 8, 1909. Dun. Apparatus for injecting fuel into internal-combustion motors.
960,057. May 31, 1910. Tnrnbull, jl'. Means for feeding fluid f uel.
*1,003,019. Sept. 12, 19l1. Webb. Gas engine.
1,027,054. May 21, 1912. L eflai\"e. Atomizer for fluid-fu el motors.
1,028,713. June 4, 1912. Grinewezki, Carbureter for internal-combustion
motors.
1,069,341. Au g. 5, 1913. Lemp. Pul,erizer for oil engines.
1,094,075. Apr. 21, 1914. Kiser. Fuel atomizer.
1,112,877. Oct. 6, 1914. Wigelius. Fuel injector.
1,112,878. Oct. 6, 1914. Wige!ius. Fuel injector .
1,117. 45. Ko\-, 17, 1914. lie selman_ Vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
1,122,770, Dec. 29, 1914. Lake, Fuel injector for internal-combustion engines.
1,130,229. 1\1ar. 2, 1915. Wigeliu . Fuel sprayer.
1,135,418. Apr. 13, 1915. Wigelius. Gas moto r .
1,142,623. June 8, 1915. R egenbogen. Fuel injector.
1,149,322. Aug. 10, 1915. Baker. l\lethod of and apparatus for feeding liquid
f uel to internal-combustion engines.
.
1,155,266. Sept. 28, 1915. Pasel. Fuel-injecting device.
j ,157,273.
Oct. 19, 1915. Winc
lcler. Fuel injector.
] ,157,305. Oct. 19, 1915. Frost. P ulverizer for oil engines.
1,157,315. Oct. 19, 1915. Lemp. Fuel injector.
1,163,059. D ec. 7, 1915, Bell. Carbureting device.
1,164.064. Dec. 14, 1915. Brown. Fuel injector.
1,171,787. F eb. 15, 1916. H arriS. Atomizer for internal-combustion engines.
] ,184,779. May 30, 1916.
haw. Aeratiug fu el pump for explosive motors.
1,182,120. May 9, 1916. Verh ey. In ternal-combu tion engine.
1,189,338. July 4, 1916. Askew. Internal-combustion engine.

Oross-1'elel'ence patents, cla-Ys 128, sttbcla88 181.
153,952
225,778
228,547
238,757
302,045
309,835
350,200
350,769
386,029

500.477
504,723
507,989
542,410
552,718
562,307
574,614
582,073
583,982

609,831
612.258
617,530
637,299
659,9ll
690.486
703,769
706,494
730,084

745,573
765,880
800.996
807,835
816,549
863,516
867,605
872,419
873,392

876,287
904,455
904,508
904,855
908,112
918,607
922,145
922.383
924.926

930,483
943,684
948.977
966.581
982,825
989,026
1.021.079
1,060,053
1.033,111

1,096.585
1,099,995
1,101,271
1,121,137
1,142,4{0
1,143.258
1,150.562
1,161,095

SUBCLASS 132, CHARGE FORMING DEVICES, ATOllIIZERS, CONSTAKT LEVEL.

* 595,552.

Dec. 14, 1897,

B:lllki & C onka.

Gasoline motor.

* 623,568. Apr. 25, 1899. Secor. Explosive engine.

* 633,274.

Sept. 19, 1899. Riotte. Vaporizer for gas en"'ines,
1900. Kiltz. Vaporizer for petr oleum en "'ines.
1900. Kennedy. Gasoline engine f uelroil feeder.
* 671,743. Apr. 9, 1901. White. Mixing and vaporizing device for explosive
engines.
.
678,077. July 9, 1901. Webb. Fuel-supply controller for hydrocarbon engines.
* 681,382. Aug. 27, 1901. We tmun. Feed cup for explosive engines.
* 711,902. Oct. 21, 1902. Leppo. Carburetor fo r e:\.l)losive engines,
765,880. July 26, 1904. Chamberlin. Mean for feeding the induction ports
or fuel inlets of internal-combustion engines.
* 790,379. May. 23, 1905. Mingst. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
* 801,539. Oct. 10, 1905. l\lorelanrl. Carburetting apparatus and feed therefor
for interna1-combustion engines.
* 805,979. Nov. 28, 1905. l\lenges. Carburetor.
* 817,941. Apr. 17, 1906. Stute. Ca rburetor.
842,261. J a n. 29, 1907. Smith. Means for contrOlling the supply of vapor
to in ternal-combustion engines.

* 657,739. Sept.] 1,
* 658,267. Sept. 18,

78

AER ONAUTICS.

* 887,370. l\Iay 12, 1908. Winton & Ander son. Carburetor .
* 896.559. Aug. 18, 1908. Longuemare. Air-inlet regulator for carburetors.

* 898,920.
903,479.
* 906,980.

Sept. 15, 1908. Pierson. Carburetor.
Nov. 10, 1908. Kemp. Safety curbur~ ting plant.
Dec. 15, 1908. Winton & Andersoll. Carburetor.
933,888. Sept. 14, 1909. Charter. Float-controlled oil-supply device for gas
engines.
1,047,595. Dec. 17, 1912. Twigg. Speed-regulating ca rburetor.
1,072,402. Sept. 2, 1913. Peregrine. Ga generator for explosive engines.
,. 1,106.802. Aug. 11, 1914. Goldberg. Carburetor.
1,166,560. J a n. 4, 1916. Tice. Carburetor.

Cross-reference patents, class 123, subclass 132.
477.295
542,043
549,939
554,699
557,496
605,815
622,891
627,857

664,200
677,2 3
686,092
686,101
690,610
696,146
733,625
740,571

747.264
771,492
791.501
796,712
806,434
806,460
810,435
822,172

823,742
832,1 3
832,532
839,707
844,900
846,471
849,538
851,759

855,5 2
865,522
872,336
886,527
897,259
907.953
920,231
928,939

931,389
948,612
952,326
958, 97
961,152
975,796
1,025,814
1,063,866

1,117,641
1,117,642

CLASS 48, GAS, HEATING AND ILLUMINATION .
SUBCLASS 144, CARBURETORS .

49.526. Aug. 22, 1865. Irwin. Improved apparatus for carbureting air .
55,949. June 26, 1866. - - -. Improved apparatu for carbureting air.
80.918. Aug. n, 1868. Coons. Improved carburetor.
94,360. Aug. 31, 1869. Tirrill. Carburetor.
103,836. June 7, 1870. Boyle. Improvement in pneumatic gas machines.
105,561. July 19, 1870. Foster & Ganster. Improyement in gas apparatus for
railroads, etc.
107,263. Sept. 13, 1870. H yde. Improvement in blowpipes.
115,798. June 6, 1871. Whitney. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
gas and all'.
130,004. Jul y 30, 1872. Averell. Improvement in carburetors.
134,240. Dec. 24, 1872. Averell. Improvement in carburetors.
137.307. Apr. I, 1873. Kromschroeder. Improvement in carburetors.
151,896. June 9, 1874. McFaddin. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air and gas.
153,872. Aug. 4, 1874. Wheeler. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
169,658. Nov. 9, 1875. Randolph. Improvement in apparatus for ligbting railway cars.
181.544. Aug. 29, 1876. Tirrill. I mpr ovement in carburetors.
257,247. May 2, 1882. Shaler. Carburetor.
268,878. Dec. 12, 1882. Tessie du l\Iotay & Ster. Process and app aratus for
distributing liquid fuel in cities.
342,445. May 25, 1886. Lawrence. Carburetors.
478,549. July 12, 1892. Bailey. Fuel-gas apparatus.
494.442. Mar. 28, 1893. Ruthven. Carbureting appar atu .
527,789. Oct. 23, 1894. Heckert & Rowland. Process anel apparatus for making
gas.
560,388. May 19, 1 96. Barker. Apparatus for carburetin'" ail'.
650,367. May 29, 1900. Bouchauel-Praceiq. Apparatu for carbureting air and
transporting liquids.
687,756. Dec. 3, 1901. Kemp. Carburetor.
693,273. F eb. 11, 1902. Jervis. Carburetor.
716,452. Dec. 23, 1902. Mainwaring. Carbur etor.
760,296. May 17, 1904. Anderson & Erick on. Ga oline gas-making machine.
818,397. Apr. 17, 1906. Tresenreuter. Carburetor.
895.717. Aug. 11, 1908. Bolten tern. Gns machine.
908,402. Dec. 29, 1908. Fox. High-pres me lighting a nd heating apparatus.
923,377. June I , 1909. Schmidt. Carburetor.
933,064. Sept. 7, 1909. Dennie. Carburetec1-a ir apparatus.
940,916. Nov. 23, 1909. Alldredge. Supply tank and carbur etor for gas plants.

AEBON AUTICS.

79

*1,008,155. Noy . 7, 1911. Iber. Attachment for internal-combustion engines.
1,023,397. Apr. 16, 1912. Rogers. Attachment for carburetors.
1,076.401. Oct. 21, 1913. Armstrong. Gas generator.
*1,098,783. June 2, 1914. Daimler. Carburetor.
*1,105,003. Ju ly 28, 1914. Secor. Carburetor.
*1,123,876. Jan. 5, 1915. Hiddleson. Ca rburetor.
1,152,298. Ag. 31. 1915. Cornelius. Charge-forming device.
1,161.243. Nov. 23, 1915. Oliver. Gravity valve.
"'1,179,664. Apr. 18, 1916. Shakespeare & Schmidt. Carburetors.
9,037 Re. J an. 6, 1880. Randolph. }.. pparatus for lighting milway cars.

Cross-1'eference patents, class 48, subclass 1-'14.
156,172
168,910

284,373
489, 762

554,207
932,478

951,590 1.024, 501 1,082, 865 1,111,620
995,882 1,043,691

SUBCLASS 145, CARRUBETORS, REGULATING.

24,199. lIfay 31, 1859. Covel. Carburetors.
27,190. Feb. 14, 1860. Laubach. Vapor burner.
34,557. lIfar. 4, 1862. Bassett. Carburetor.
38,357. Apr. 28. 1863. Gwynn. Carburet;)r.
42,469. Apr. 26, 1864. Griffin. Improved apparatus for vaporizing hydrocarbon liquids for illuminating.
64,776. l\lay 14, 1867. Laubach. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas.
65,705. June 11, 1867. Stevens. Improved apparatus for tr:eating air and
hydrocarbon vapor for illuminating gas.
66,067. June 25, 1 67. Bas ett. Apparatus for carbureting and regulating
the flow of gas.
06,545. July 9, 1 67. Wood. Apparatus for carbureting air and regulating
its flow.
67,216. July 30, 1867. Ransom. Carbureting apparatus.
67,570. Aug. 6. 1 67. Pease. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
67,840. Aug. 20, 1867. Beacher. Improved valve for gas generato rs.
71,514. Nov. 26, 1867. MacDougall. Portable gas apparatus and carburetor.
72,825. Dec. 31, 1867. Earseman & Gray. Ca rbureting coal gas.
83.147. Oct. 20, 1868. Frank. Improved machine for ca rbureting air.
103,994. June 7, 1870. Dailey. CarbUretor.
104.042.
115,182. May 23, 1871. Edmonds. Improyement in apparatus for carbureting.
125,lD4. Apr. 2, 1872. Holton. Improvement in carburetors.
]41.886. Aug. 19, 1873. Olney. Gas apparatus for railway cars.
J49,111. l\lar. 1, 1874. Fish. Apparatus for carbureting gas and air.
] 50,827. May 12, 1874. Cayce. Improyement in carburetors.
153,538. July 28, 1 74. Cohen. CarburetinO' gas machine.
:104,825. June 22, 1875. Fish. Apparatus for carbureting and purifying gas
and air.
170.097. Nov. 16, 1875. McKis ock. Improyement in carburetors.
170.788. Dec. 7, 1875. Vasquez. Improvement in aas-generating apparatus.
204,974. June 18, 1878. Hyams. Apparatus fo r carbureting ai r .
224,576. Feb. 17, 1880. Boelden. Illumination of railroad cars.
226,122. Mar. 30, 18 O. Smyers. Ca rbureting apparatus.
238,818. Mar. 15, 1881. Walmsley. Carburetor.
311,858. Feb. 3, 1885. Strong. Gas machine.
353,499. Nov. 30, 1886. Plass. Apparatus for lighting and heating railway
cars, etc.
38:3,485. July 3, 1888. Stubbers. Carburetor.
554,630. Feb. 11, 1896. Vestal & Ray. Gas generator.
563,799. July 14, 1896. Porter. Carburetor.
596,658. Jan. 4, 1 98. Fell. Apparatus for producing uniform mixtures of air
and inflammable vapor.
622,489. Apr. 4, 1899. Kelly. Carburetor.
623,321. Apr. 18, 1899. Lara. Carburetor .
639,965. Dec. 26, 1899. Doze. Carburetor.
673,542. May 7, 1901. Johnson. Apparatus for making gas.
759,539. May 10, 1904. Merrege. Ca rburetor.

80

AERONAUTICS.

763,965. July 5, 1904. Colbath. Carburetor.
767,485. Aug. 16, 1904. Merrege. Carburetor.
768,732. Aug. 30, 1904. Bruce. Carburetor.
793,776. July 4, 1905. Fallin. Carburetor.
82 ,284. Aug. 7, 1906. Gla scoe. Carburetor.
841,779. J an. 22, 1907. Hinman & Wellman. Gas appar atus.
842,846. Jan. 29, 1907. Carburetor air apparatus.
843,554. Feb. 5, 1907. Schrader. Carburetor.
848.963. Apr. 2, 1907. Bu nbenz. Ga -manufacturing apparatus .
852,685. 1\1ay 7, 1907. Speer. Carburetin g appa ratus.
854.604. 1\1ay 21, 1907. Reichenbach.
arburetor.
860,334. July 16, 1907. Schell. Carburetor.
8 3,171. 1\1ar. 31, 190 . Colbath. Carburetor.
941,393. Noy. 30, 1909. Warmsley.
arburetor.
944,482. Dec. 2 , 1909. Elliott. Carburetol·.
947,639. Jan. 25, 1910. Hill & 'Yest\yood. Carburetor.
947,717. Jan. 25, 1910. 1\1ieyille. Apparatu for the production of carbureted air.
949,140. Feb. 15, 1910. Becker. Automatic carbureting machine.
953,606. Mar. 29, 1910. Grandjean. Carbureting apparatus.
959,350. May 24, 1910. John. on. Carbureting apparatus.
95!J.745. May 31, 1910. Hulse. Regulator for '"'as-ligl1tino- systems.
976,781. Nov. 22, 1910. Busch. Apparatus for producing carbureted air.
1,022,451. Apr. 9, 1912. Whitacre. Carburetor.
1,024,501 ( ?). Apr. 30, 1912. Dixon. Lighting apparatus.
1,064,273. June 10, 1913. Wortman. Carbureting apparatus.
1,0 0,471. Dec. 2, 1913. OJ en. Air-gas apparatus.
1,082,070. Dec. 23, 1913. Cox. Air-gas apparatus.
1,0 9,471. Mar. 10, 1914. Hunt & Peloubet. Carbuetor.
1,109,085. Sept. 1, 1914. Schmidt. Carbureting apparatus.
1,116,325. Nov. 3, 1914. Ponarouse. Carburetor.
Re. 2357. Sept. 18, 1866. Bassett.
Re.5465.

Gross-reference patents, class 48, sltbclass 145.
35,144
43.264
49,934
50.076
50,987
52,876
53,504
57,164

57,940
59,991
6 ,666
81,232
2,244
82,7 6
84,332
84,941

97,748
102,784
103,036
151,392
221,680
224,592
262,991
395,616

440,486
500,772
531,780
596,321
607. 8
607,8 9
61 .108
65 ,020

672,507
68 ,408
725,148
760,296
813,796
39,540
55,094
950,825

951,590
962, 60
975,038
976,885
979,761
9 2,490
1,017,572
1,027,340

1,027,456
1,050,322
1,070,394
1,108,081

SUBCLASS 146, CARBUBETORS, SERIE .

47,258. Apr. 11, 1865. Simmons & Irwin. I mproved apparatus for carbureting
air.
54,132. Apr. 24. 1866. Drake. I mprovement in apparatus for carbureting air.
82,359. Sept. 22, 1 68. Slatter. " I mproyed carburetor.
92,317. July 6, 1869. Kelley. I mproved gas generator .
112.111. Feb. 28, 1871. Bell. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting ai r.
113,317. Apr. 4, 1871. Lutewitte. I mprovement in apparatus for carbur eting
air and gas.
120,590. Noy. 7, 1871. Lowden. I mprovement in portable gas apparatus.
193,407. July 24, 1 77. Hill. Apparatus for manufacturing illuminating gas.
211,194. Jan. 7, 1 79. Tackeberry. Apparatu for carbureting air.
221,942.
ov. 25, 1879. Savage. I mprovement in \"apor-ga apparatus.
307,132. Oct. 28, 1884. Mayer. Apparatus for manufacturing gas.
324,177. Aug. 11, 1885. Singer. Carburetor.
356,477. Jan. 25, 1887. Jobnston. Process and apparatus for manufacturing
beating gas.
370,936. Oct. 4, 1887. Drake. Carbureting apparatus.
405,747. June 25, 1889. Snyder & Stephen Oll. Apparatus for carbu reting air
or gas.
457,803. Aug. 18, 1891. Vanorman. Carburetor.

AERONAUTICS.

81

484,721. Oct. 18, 1892. Parris. Carbureting apparatus.
501,778. July 18, 1893. Fontaine. Apparatu for carbureting air.
518,582. Apr. 24, 1894. Bidelman. Apparatus for the manufacture of gas.
654,686. July 31, 1900. Steele. Carburetor.
659,476. Oct. 9, 1900. Hodder . Carburetor.
673,365. Apr. 30, 1901. Hopkins. Carburetor.
647,812. lUay 31, 1901. McCormick. Carburetor.
690,681. Jan. 7, 1902. Van Del' Made. Apparatus for carbureting air.
692,255. Feb. 4, 1902. Doolan. Carbuz·etor.
702,637. June 17, 1902. Deringer. Carburetor.
707,897. Aug. 26, 1902. Betzel. Carburetor.
714,117.
Jov. 18, 1902. Steele. Gas-making apparatus.
716.227. Dec. 16, 1902. Harvey. Carburetor.
735,011. July 28, 1903. Avery & Smith. Apparatus for carbureting air.
774,485. Nov. 8, 1904. Marshall. Apparatus for carbureting air.
836,795.
ov. 27, 1906. Wright. Carburetor.
84!,995. Feb. 17, 1907. Colbath. Carburetor.
1,014,133. Jan. 9, 1912. Ducker. Carburetor.
1,075,598. Oct. 14, 1913. Myers. Carburetor for household and other uses.
1,170,510. Feb. 8, 1916. Carpenter. Gas scrubber.
1,171,183. Feb. 8, 1916. Duckham. Ye rti cal r etort.
*1,177,538. Mar. 28, 1916. Roberts. Carburetor.
Re. 3,924. Apr. 19, 1870. Kelly. Gas o-euerator.
Re. 4,890. May 7, 1872. Bell. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
Re. 11,430. July 10, 1894. Vanorman. Carbm·etor.
C1'oss-reterence patents, class 48, subclass 146.

217,800

356,476

483,489

576,499

780.353

942,863

962,860

S1tbclass 143, cU1'bul'etors, hea tel'.

50,251. Oct. 3, 1865. Irwin. Impro,etl apparatus for carbureting air.
55,395. June 5, 1866. Tirrill. Impro\'ed gas apparatus.
63,215. Mar. 26, 1867. Clarke. Improve 1 apparatus for carbureting air, etc.
63,511. Apr. 2, 1 67. Hall. Impro\'ed apparatus fo r carbureting gas and air.
66,777. July 16, 1867. Barker & Gilbert. Improved apparatus fOl' carbureting
air and gas.
93,267. Aug. 3, 1869. Barker & Gilbert. Improved apparatus for carbureting
air.
93,268. Aug. 3, 1869. Barker & Gilbert. Improved apparatus for carbureting
air.
94,982. Sept. 21, 1869. Spang & Scheaf. Impro,ed gas machine.
117,998. Aug. 15, 1871. Edgerton. ImlJl'Oyement in methods and apparatus
for separating certain hydrocarbon ,upors from illuminating gases.
127,031. lUay 21, 1872. - Dayton. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air.
174,851. Mar. 14, 1876. Porter & Grimes. Improvement in carburetors.
175,827. Apr. 11, 1876. Deeds. Improvement in air-gas machines.
176,955. l\lay 2, 1876. Ha ymaker. Improvement in carbureting gas apparatus.
176,349. Feb. 26, 1876. Porter & Grimes. Carburetors.
180,638. Aug. 1, 1876. Randall & Boomer. Improvement in apparatus for automatically regulating the temperature of carburetors.
184,049. Nov. 7, 1876. Ofeldt. Improvem pl1t iu a utomatic h eat regulators
for gas machines.
211,308. Jan. 14, 1879. Pierce. I mprovement in thermo. tats for carburetors.
221,680. Nov. 18, 1879. Jones. Improvement in air-carbureting apparatus
for railroad cars.
288,622. Nov. 20, 1883. Copeland. Carburetor.
360,533. Apr. 5, 1887. Langdon. Apparatus for making gas.
411,809. Oct. 1, 1889. H amlin. Gas enricher.
422,322. Feb. 25, 1890. Strouse. Carburetor.
427,197. l\lay 6, 1890. Shannon. Carburetor.
500,772. July 4, 1893. :Marcus. Carbureting apparatus.
522,418. July 3, 1894. Iles. Carburetor.
566,413. Aug. 25, 1896. Schrader. Carburetor.
72805°- S. Doc. 559, 64-2- - 6

82

AERONAUTICS.

613.167. October 25, 1898. Martenette. Carburetor.
*638,529. Dec. 5, 1899. Vanduzen. Vaporizer for explosive engines.
643,306. Feb. 13, 1900. Rey. Carburetor.
658,020. Sept. 18, 1900. Rey. Carburetor.
661,660. Nov. 13, 1900. Griebel. Carburetor.
*665,496. Jan. 8, 1901. Worth. Carburetor.
*694,110. Feb. 25, 1902. Sanson. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*696.231. Mar. 25, 1902. Fillet. Carbureting device for explosion engines.
*705,021. July 22, 1902. Bennett & l\Ioorwood. Carburetor.
720,336. Feb. 10, 1903. Ede. Vaporizer for gasoline engines.
*733,625. July 14, 1903. Clement. Carburetor for motor bicycles.
*746,119. Dec. 8, 1903. Longuemare et al. Carburetor for explosive motors.
749,768. Jan. 19, 1904. Wilson. Apparatus for producing carbureted air.
*762,707. June 14, 1904. Grove. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
772,673. Oct. 18, 1904. Roebuck & l\Ic)Iillan. Carburetor.
*778.988. Jan. 3, 1905. l\Ierritt. Carburetor.
*781,936. Feb. 7, 1905. Cook. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
784,599. Mar. 14, 1905. Studabaker. Carburetor.
*799.232. Sept. 12, 1905. Gosse. Carburetor.
*800,777. Oct. 3, 1905. Westmacott. Carburetor and vaporizer for explosion
engines.
842,170. Jan. 29, 1907. Bryant & Watling. Carburetor.
846,680. Mar. 12, 1907. Mason & Sinclair. Gas machine.
857.064. June 18, 1907. Holgate. Carbureting lamp.
894,389. July 28, 1908. Louis. Carburetol' for explo ion engines.
904.203. Nov. 17, 190 . H ertzberg & Low. Fuel heater for explosive engines.
906.548. Dec. 15, 1908. McCarthy. Carburetor.
909,896. Jan. 19, 1909. Hertzberg & Low. Electric yaporizer for internalcombustion engines.
920,721. May 4. 1909. Bradley. Grass burner for l'ailway tracks.
*954,905. Apr. 12, 1910. 'Yolf. Carburetor.
957,786. May 10, 1910. Low, Wohl & Hertzberg. Vaporizing deyice.
962, 60. June 28, 1910. Sanders. Carburetor.
"964,657. July 19, 1910. Lamb. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
990,249. Apr. 25, 1911. Garcia & Hertzberg. Starting vaporizer for explosive engines.
1,011,641. Dec. 12, 1911. Paterson. Carburetor.
*1,013,983. Jan. 9. 1912. Blom. Carburetor.
*1,014,945. Jan. 16, 1912. Erocklmrst. Means for feeding and mixing fluids.
*1,043,342. Nov. 5, 1912. :lIIusgrave. Carburetors for gas engines.
*1,061,626. May 13, 1913. Mowbray. Carburetor.
*1.065,640. June 24, 1913. Thomp on. Fuel-vaporizing device.
*1,065,948. July 1, 1913. Lion. Carburetor.
"1,072,875. Sept. 9, 1913. Sammons. Carburetor mechani m.
J ,091,784. Mar. 31, 1914. Weber. Carburetor.
] ,095.555. May 5, 1914. Crone. Mixing unit for fluids.
*1,099,086. June 2, 1914. Hamilton. Carburetor.
1 .102.309. July 7, 1014. Whiting. Heater for gaseou fuel.
1,102,478. July 7, 1914. Cro\"der. Ga eou -fuel heater.
J ,107,489. Aug. 1 ,1914. Bunn & Robinson. Carburetor.
1.107.967. Aug. 18, 1914. Knaak. Heater for internal-combustion engines.
1,109,025. Sept. 1, 1914. Taylor. Fuel heater.
J ,114,200. Oct. 20, 1914. Stewart. Throttle for carburetors.
1,117,414. Nov. 17, 1914. Manning. Fuel heater.
"1,118,126. Nov. 24, 1914. Harroun. Carburetor.
1,120.352. Dec. 8, 1914. Wolf. Carburetor.
*1,122.703. Dec. 29, 1914. Dull. Carburetor.
1,128,998. Feb. 16. 1915. Iulvaney. Heater for gaseous fuel.
1,129,794. Feb. 23, 1915. Cummings. Carburetor.
*1,130,502. Mar. 2, 1915. Francisco. Carburetor.
*1,133,452. Mar. 30, 1915. Babbitt & Beaumont. Carburetor.
*1,133,527. Mar. 30. 1915. B ennett. Carburetor.
1,134,366. Apr. 6, 1915. Barnes. Carburetor.
1,136,675. Apr. 20, 1915. Hutchinson. Carburetor.
J,137,219. Apr. 27, 1915. Leake. Heater lind attachment for motors.
1,140,064. May 18, 1915. Rakestraw. Carburetor.
1,141,570. June 1, 1915. McCornack. Carburetor.

~-------------------------

83

AERONAUTICS.

1,142,824. June 15, 1915. Lu nd. Carburetor attachment.
1,148.247. July 27, 1915. Moore. CarbUl'etor.
J ,150,115. Aug. 17, 1915. H einze, Carburetor.
1,150.619. Aug. 17, 1915. P ercival & Patterson. Kerosene carburetor.
1,155,726. Oct. 5, 1915. Harroun. Carburetor.
1,156, 36. Oct. 12, 1915. Diener. Carburetor.
1,158,494. Nov. 2, 1915. H a rroun. Cat'buretor.
"1,159,933. Nov. 9, 1915. Grove. Carburetor.
1,160,585. Nov. 16. 1915. Edison. Fuel-supplying means.
*1.166.173. Dec. 28, 1915. Biays. Carburetor.
*1,167,457. J an. 11, 1916. WiC
kersham. Ca rburetor .
*1,169,340. J a n. 25, 1916. Meara. Carbur etor.
1,169,573. J an. 25, 1916. Schultz. Vaporizer.
"1,172.397. Feb. 22, 1916. Schulz. Carburetor .
1,173,469. Feb. 29, 1916. White. Carbm·etor.
"1,176,816. Mar. 2 , 1916. Hampton (Ie Fontaine. Kerosene carburetor.
~ 1,177,940. Apr. 4, 1916. Ford . Carburet or.
"1,178,530. Apr. 11, 1916. L ytle, Klawiter , Kritch. Carburetor.
"'1,182,714. May 9, 1916. Schmidt. Carburetor.
1,189,797. July 4, 1916. Deppe. H eater and mixer for internal·combustion
engines.
1,187,375. June 13, 1916. O'Connor. Carbur etor.

Cross-reference patents, class 48, 81tbclass 148.
9,967
12,535
13,010
57,788
57,812
62,856
64.382
80,404
80,918
90,445
94.898
97,748
109,568
127,031
141,968

162,848
163,323
167,170
168,048
16 ,290
206,196
206.402
213,351
221,942
307,132
308,796
309,467
320,460
348,917
353,499

356,950
360,240
367.936
376,248
377,607
405,747
427,225
435,856
464,779
563,541
564,429
568,672
590,893
620,586
622,008

622,489
629,581
639.336
640,695
659,987
671,042
673,365
674,812
680,961
688,408
692,255
714,117
715.398
716,227
737,738

777.908
837,984
842,846
843,554
890,970
892,726
894,656
949,140
957,731
959,745
973,602
976,885
979,409
994,574
1,004,329

1,016,741 1,124,724
1,017,750 1,126,218
1,023,402 1,143,092
1,036,812 1,149,291
1,046,344 1,152,134
1,049,417 1,160,837
1,056,760 1,160,897
1,079,338 1,163,223
1,079,947 1,168,782
1,095,402 Re.1,819
1,105,371 Re.6,865
1,106,935 R e.l0,358
1,117,354
1,119,479
1,124,706

SUBCLASS 140, CAl!J3URETORS, HEATER, AIR.

26,070. Nov. 8, 1859. Kitchen. Apparatus for heating hydrocarbon liquids.
47,257. Apr. 11, 1865. Ir\\·in. I mproved process fo r carbureting air.
53,482. l\lar. 27, 1 66. Pond & Richardson. Improved ga appar atus.
57,639. Au"'. 23, 1866. Rowley, Sloane et al. Improved apparatus for carbm'eting a ir.
66,622. July 9, 1867. P edrick. Improvement in carbureting air.
76,880. Apr. 21, 1868. Barker. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
79,667. July 7, 1868. Mat·sha ll. Impr oved air carbure tor.
96,073. Oct. 26, 1869. B arbarin Improved machine for carbureting atmospheric air.
97,283. Nov. 30, 1869. Dunderdale. I mproved appar atus for carbureting air.
110,946. Jan. 10, 1871. Works & Daniels. Improvement in apparatus and
processes f or generating and burning vapor fu el.
140,105. June 17, 1873. ' Vilkinson. Improvement in carbur etors.
155,974. Oct. 13, 1874. Rand. Improvement in carburetors.
167,170. Aug. 31, 1875. H a rrington. I mprovement in carburetors.
187,415. Feb. 13, 1877. R and. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
198,150. D ec. 11, 1877. Porter. Improvement in plastic jacket and condenser
for carburetors.
220,685. Oct. 14, 1879. Weart. Improvement in carbm'eting apparatus.
311,493. Feb. 3, 1885. J ames. Apparatus for genet'ating gas.
403,839. May 21, 1889. Harvey. Furnace and apparatus for prodUCing and
burI;ling gaseous vapor'.
.
*531,779. Jan. 1, 1895. Cook. Carburetor.

-- - -

84

AERONAUTICS.

633.320. Sept. 19, 1899. I nman. Carburetor.
672,854. Apr. 23, 1901. Goldsmith. Carburetor.
*685.993. Nov. 5, 1901. Le Blom. Carburetor for explosive engines.
689,460. Dec. 24, 1901. Clark & Cothran. Carburetor.
*741,810. Oct. 20, 1903. Mohler. Constant-level liquid-hyd r ocarbon vaporizer
for oil engines.
768,801. Aug. 30, 1904. Hooker. Carburetor.
831,374. Sept. 18, 1906. Perrier. Apparatus for the pro luction of carbureted
air.
906,276. Dec. 8, 1908. Peregrine. Apparatu for carbureting ai r.
*1,017,572. Feb. 13, 1912. Luud. Attachment for carburetors.
1,0615,819. June 24, 1913. Lion. Device for carbureting air.
1,066,295. July 1. 1913. Lion. De,ice for carbureting air.
1,091,521. Mar. 31, 1914. Lund . Temperature controller for carburetors.
1,113,892. Oct. 13, 1914. Feller. Carburetor.
1,132,199. Mar. 16, 1915. McKeen. Air heater for carburetors.
1,139,081. May 11, 1915. Stone. Fuel economizer for internal-combu tion
engines.
1,141,450. June I, 1915. Erick on . Device for supplying heated air to carburetors.
*1,145,476. July 6, 1915. Fulton. Carburetor.
Re. 2,455. J an. 15, 1867. Poud & Richardson. Improyed gas apparatus.

Cross-ref erence patents, class It , subclass
52,087
90,436
100.0 0
127.031
162.848
166,602

175,827
221,942
254.243
309.467
370,936
427,225

43:-. 56
47 ,549
505,700
590. 93
673,365
714,117

723.487
742,920
911,967
921,934
951,501
961,4 1

1,004,329
1,011,641
1,013,9 3
1,046,344
1,064,106
1,064, 66

1.~9 .

1,070.449
1.072, 75
1,107,967
1.109,025
1,120,128
1,125,339

1,132,420
1.158,494

S1:DCLASS 150, CAllD"lllETOR , OIL FI:ED.

58,422. Oct. 2, 1866. Hutchin on. Improved automatic feed for carburetors.
68,231. Aug. 27, 1 67. Peacock. Impro\'ed carbureting apparatus.
81,590. Sept. 1, 1868. Brin. Appro,ed apparatus for carbureting air and applying the same.
97,748. Dec. 7, 1 69.
pringer. Impro,ed gas machine.
]08,00:-. Oct. 4, 1869. Chapin. Improyement in apparatus for carbureting air
and gas.
111,175. Jan. 24, 1 71. Chapin. Improyement in apparatus for carbureting
air.
190,714. l\Iay 15, 1877. Enggl·en. Improyement in ga carburetors.
198,353. D c. 1 , 1877. Chollar. Impro,ement in automatic feed regulators
for carburetor .
212,502. Feb. 18, 1879. Reed. Improvement in feed regulators for carburetors.
230,744. Aug. 3, 1880. Chace. Gas governor and regulator for carburetors.
253,713. Feb. 14, 1 82. Jackson. Oil-t1istributing mechani m for carburetor. .
443,214. Dec. 23, 1 DO. Addicks. Heater for hydrocarbon liquids.
568,944. Oct. 6, 1896. Griffen. De,ice for charging 11)' drocarbon-gus generators.
679,018. July 23, 1901. Fischer. Oil .feed for carburetors.
772,791. Oct. 18, 1904. Dow'. Carburetor.
*792,670. June 20, 1005. Shain. Ya110rizer or carburetor for gas engines.
810,087. Jan. 16, 1906. Sanders. Carburetor.
817,592. Apr. 10, 1906. Shiess. Carburetor.
820,554. l\Iay 15, 1906. Colbath. Carburetor.
834,029. Oct. 23, 1906. Smith. Carburetor.
835,745. 'ov. 13, 1906. Bouchaud-Praceiq. Automatic apparatus for carbureting air and other gases.
855,407. May 28, 1907. Loe'l\enstein. Carburetor.
866,587. Sept. 17, 1907. J ohnson . Gas machine.
876,678. Jan. 14, 190. Andres. Carburetor.
*894,225. July 28, 1908. O'Neill. Explosive engine.

85

AERONAUTICS.

912,468. Feb. 16, 1909. Grancljean. Oil feed for carbureting appar atus.
913,857. Mar. 2, 1909. Steward. Oarburetor.
929,135. July 27, 1909. Osgrig. Oarburetor.
934,366. Sept. 14, 1909. Steel. Means for s upplying oil to carburetors.
951,779. Mar. 8, 1910. French. Oarburetor.
975,156. Nov. 8, 1910. Pi~plu. Oarburet or .
984,032. Feb. 14, 1911. Seager. Oarburetor.
1,063,081. May 27, 1913. Thiem. Apparatus for the production of air gas.
*1,110,131. Sept. 8, 1914. Green. Automatic regulator of carburetors.
*1,133,872. Mar. 30, 1915. Maness. Gas-engine attachment.
*1,137,135. Apr. 27, 1915. Hart. Oarburetor.
*1,163,393. Dec. 7, 1915. Oorbett. Oarburetor.
Re. 6,070. J an. 24, 1871. Chapin. I mprovement in carburetors.
Cross-1'efer ence patents, class

93,267
114,358
135,806
169,034
211,194
219,158

320,460
333,508
589,094
592,579
758,790

763,074
775,859
777,390
782,788
782,980

783,790
794,938
818,207
818.397
823,382

48,

S1lbclass 150.

923,377
932,478
949,140
953,606
940,916

944,482
948,744
962,860
964,165
976,781

979,761
1,002,791
1,046,653
1,089,471
1,137,219-

SUBCLASS 150.1, CAllBUllETORS, OIL FEED, MULTIPLE SUPPLY.

683,125. Sept. 24, 1901. Laurent & Oler get. Vaporizing device for explosive
engines.
*684,662. Oct. 15, 1901. Ahara. Feeder for explosive engines.
'756,879. Apr. 12, 1904. McOadden. Carburetor for internal-combustion
engines.
*771,492. Oct. 4, 1904. Parmenter. Carburetor for explosive engines.
798,150. Aug. 29, 1905. Wolgamott. Oarburetor for gas engines.
*811,618. Feb. 6, 1906. Claude!. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*871,288. Nov. 19, 1907. Merwin. Gas-saturating device.
*877,890. J an. 28, 1908. Gerber & Weiland. Vaporizer.
*907,953. Dec. 29, 1908. Baverey. Carburetor for explosion motors.
923,093. May 25, 1909. Wegner. Gasoline engine.
943,684. Dec. 21, 1909. John ·ton. Vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
977,066. Nov. 29, 1910. Blow. Oarburetor.
982,826. Jan. 31, 1911. Johnston. Mixing valve .for internal-combustion engines.
983,994. Feb. 14, 1911. Harrington . Oarburetor.
*1,003.351. Sept. 12, 1911. Fulton. Oarburetor.
*1,013.759. Jan. 2, 1912. Freidag. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,021.326 . Mar. 26, 1912. Mowbray. Hydrocarbon vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
1,029,740. June 18, 1912. Beck. Oarbureting appa r lltus for explosive engines.
1,038.780. Sept. 17, 1912. Moore & Br owne. Engine.
1,043,080.
Jo v . 5, 1912. Duis. Moisture-supplying device for carbur eted air.
1,048.620. Dec. 31, 1912. Wiliams. Oarburetor.
*1055,084. Mar. 4, 1913. RUluely. Oarburetor.
*1,062,333. May 20, 1913. Higgins. Oarburetor.
*1,069,399. Aug. 5, 1913. Eckre. Carburetor.
*1,077.910. Nov. 4, 1913. Higgins. Carburetor.
*1.0 4.151. Jan. 13, 1914. Ireland. Carburetor.
*1,085,239. Jan. 27, 1914. Bischop. Bifuel carburetor.
*1,095,384. May 5, 1914. Collett. Carburetor.
*1,095,622. May 5, 1914. Bruun. Oarburetor.
*1,099.277. June 9, 1914. Baverey. Carburetor.
*1,099,547. June 9, 1914. Gentle. Carburetor.
*1.101,147. June 23, 1914. Sawyer. Admi sion valve.
*1,102,722. July 7, 1914. Oobb. Oarburetor.
*1,104,762. July 2 , 1914. Ahlberg. Oarbu r etor.
*1,108,181. Aug. 25, 1914. Kane. Oarburetor.
*1,111,224. Sept. 22, 1914. Hamilton. Oarburetor.
*1,112,641. Oct. 6, 1914. Moeller. F luid mix ing and r egul ating devlce_

86

AERON AUTICS.

1,120,602. Dec. 8, 1914. Corser. Carburetor.
*1,121,651. Dec. 22, 1914. Mohler & Fry. Carbureting apparatus.
*1,124,724. Jan. 12, 1915. Gentle. Carburetor.
*1,132,580. Mar. 23, 1915. Hazen. Carburetor.
*1,137,135. Apr. 27, 1915. Hart. Carburetor.
*1,138, 29. May 11, 1915. Ahlberg. Carburetor.
*1,141,258. June 1, 1915. Joyes. Liquid feeder for burners, etc.
*1,142,793. June 15, 1915. Baker. Carburetor.
*1,143,961. June 22, 1915. Haynes. Carburetor.
*1,145,990. July 15, 1915. Higgins. Carburetor.
*1,150,202. Aug. 17, 1915. Johnston & Longenecker. Carburetor.
*1,150,224. Aug. 17, 1915. Podlesak. Internal-combustion engines.
*1,152,134. Aug. 31, 1915. Webb. Carburetor.
*1,153,436. Sept. 14, 1915. McCray. Carburetor.
*1,154,630. Sept. 28, 1915. Higgins. Carburetor.
*1,155,407. Oct. 5, 1915. Dougan. Carburetor.
*1,157,116. Oct. 19, 1915. Maing & Pellegrini. Carburetor.
*1,160,239. Nov. 16, 1915. Bates. Carburetor.
*1,163,393. Dec. 7, 1915. Corbett. Carburetor.
*1,166,734. Jan. 4, 1916. Anderson. Carbm-etor.
*1,166,967. Jan. 4, 1916. Burger. Fuel-feed mechanism for internal-combustion engines.
•
*1,168,783. Jan . 18, 1916. Bucker. Carburetor.
*1,171,200. Feb. 8, 1916. Holley. Carburetor.
*1,172,263. Feb. 22, 1916. Fontaine. Carburetor for kerosene and the like.
*1,176,600. Mal'. 21, 1916. Radloff. Carburetor.
*1,177,538. Mar. 28, 1916. Roberts. Carburetor.
*1,179,27. Apr. 11, 1916. Carithers. Carburetor.
*1,183,221. l\lay 16, 1916. Miller & Adamson. Carburetor.
*1,183,293. May 16, 1916. Gilles. Carburetor.

Cross-reference patents, class 48, subclass 150.1.
439,813
575,720
581,930
593,911
625,887
632,859
668,953

672,500
698, 95
706,050
726,671
77 ,9
801,390
807,391

812,860
817,721
830,144
852,272
867,797
878,706
906,783

944,811
961,152
964,409
976.237
979,667
979,7 7
980,946

983,307
995,530
1,013,983
1,022,027
1,065,948
1,072,875
1,077,414

1,098,164 1,140,064
1,109,025 1,14 ,898
1,110,482 1,156,836
1,111,897 Re.12,322
1,116,192
1,128,998
1,133,527

SUBCLASS 150.2, CARBljnETOnS, OIL FEED, MULTIPLE .rET.

498,673. May 30, 1893. Mulvey. Apparatus for carbureting air.
*616,974. Jan. 3, 1 99. Riotte. Gas engine.
elk. Carburetor for e:->.:-plosive engines.
716,573. Dec. 23, 1902.
*726,986. May 5, 1903. Peteler. Carburetor for gas engine.
1ixer for gasoline engines.
*751,292. Feb. 2, 1904. Johanson.
*792,878. June 20, 1905. Brasier. Carburetor.
*823,485. June 12, 1906. Steinbrenner & Mayer. Carburetor for explosive
engines.
*867,859. Oct. 8, 1907. Weinat & Bogey. Carburetor.
Jov. 19, 1907. Monnier & Morin. Carburetor.
*871,134.
*891,322. June 23, 1908. Bl·ennan. Carburetor for explo ive engines.
*894,656. July 28, 1908. Johnston. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*952,547. Mar. 22, 1910. Scbwartz. Carburetor.
*973,602. Oct. 25, 1910. Williams. Carburetor.
*977,813. Dec. 6, 1910. Marrder. Carburetor.
*979,908. Dec. 27, 1910. Willet. Carburetor.
985,256. Feb. 28, 1911. Friedp.nwald. Carburetor.
*986,700. Mar. 14, 1911. Fogel. Carburetor.
*995,074. June 13, 1911. McCarthy. Priming attachment for carburetors.
"'995,919. June 20, 1911. Smith. Carburetor.
*997,929. July 11, 1911. Meyer. Carburetor.
*1,117,233. Nov. 17, 1914. Barker. Carburetor.

87

AERONAUTICS.

*1,118,805.
*1,143,092.
*1,143,779.
*1,147,644.
*1,151,989.
*1,158,435.
*1,11';0,837.
*1,167,217.
"'1,176.267.
*1,179,701.
*1,180,152.
*1,184,695.
"1,186,797.

Nov. 24, 1914. Reichenbach. Carburetor.
June 15, 1915. Unckles. Carburetor.
June 22. ]915. Pembroke. Carburetor.
July 20, 1915. Reichenbach. Carbureting device.
Aug. 31, 1913. 13aJassa. CarbUl'etor.
Nov. 2, 1915. Bourne. Carburetor.
Nov. 16, 1915. Burnham. Carburetor.
Jan. 4, 1916. Reichenbach. Carburetor.
Mar. 21, 1916. Baverey. Carburetor.
Apr. 18, 1916. Oosta. Carburetor.
Apr. IS, 1916. Howes. Carburetor.
May 23, 1916. Costa. Carburetor.
June 13, 1816. Kingston. Oarburetor.
Cl'08s-refel'ence patents, class 48, subclass 150.2.

504,723
568,017

696,146
741,810

842,261
852,272

938,S94
1,106,258

1,118,126
1,134,366

1,165,656
1,168,782

1,169,573

SUBCLASS 150.3, CARBlJ RETORS, OIL FEED, MULTIPLE JET, PROGRESSIVE.

"'664,134. Dec. 18, 1900. Dougil!. Internal-combustion engine.
*674,034. May 14, 1901. Krastin. Speed governor for explosive engines.
*755,074. Mat.. 22, 1904. Sturtevant. Double carbUretors for explosive engines.
"759,624. May 10, 1904. MacMulkin. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
*S18,853. Apr. 24, 1906. Renault. Carburetor.
"'832,lS3. Oct. 2, 1906. DUL'ye.l & Remington. Carburetor.
*832,184. Oct. 2, 1906. Duryea & Remington. Carburetor.
"'851,759. Apr. 30, 1907. Kuukei. Caz·buretor.
• 858,437. July 2, 1907. Brooke. Carburetor.
*871,320. :Nov. 19, 1907. Boll/:!e. Carburetor.
*871,741. Nov. 19, 1907. Sturtevant. Double carburetor for explosive engines.
*S79,3S0. Feb. 18, 1905' Greuter. Multiple carburetor.
"'881,416. Mar. 10, 1905. Krebs. Carbnretor.
*881,800. Mar. 10, 1908. Horstman. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*S91,219. June 16, 1908. Menns. Carburetor.
*892,499. July 7, 1908. Broderick. CarbUl'etor.
*895,709. Aug. 11, 1908. Abernethy. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*898,494. Sept. 15, 190 . Mooers. Carburetor.
*89 ,495. Sept. 15, 1908. Mooers. Carburetor.
*900,604. Oct. 6, 1908. Small. Carburetor.
*901,345. Oct. 20, 1908. Howel!. CarbUl'etor.
*907,757. Dec. 29, 1908. Duryea. Carburetor.
*910,018. Jan. 19, 1909. Prestwich. Carburetor for internal-combustion
engines.
*920,979. May 11, 1909. Morehouse. Carburetor.
*927,211. July 6, 1909. Bennett. Carburetor.
*928,121. July 13, 1909. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*932,465. Aug. 31, 1909. Haas. Carburetor.
*941,424. Nov. 30, 1909. Leonard. Carburetor.
*948,612. Feb. 8, 1910. Kt'Uuse. Carburetor for combustion engines.
*954,785. Apr. 12, 1910. Craven. Carburetor.
*958,476. May 17, 1910. Cook. Carburetor.
*961,481. June 14, 1910. Carter. Carburetor.
*970,558. Sept. 20, 1910. Ryan. Carburetor.
*973,262. Oct. 18, 1910. Daniel. Carburetor.
*976,258.
ov. 22, 1910. Gallagher. Carburetor.
*977,044.
Jov. 29, 1910. Rebourg. Carburetor.
*979,700. Dec. 27, 1910. Proehl. Carburetor.
"'982,297. Jan. 24, 1911. Perce. Carburetor.
*982,428. Jan. 24, 1911. Huggins & Parker. Carburetor.
*9 9,307. Apr. 11, 1911. Simmons. Carburetor.
*989,515. Apr. 11, 1911. Sprung & Rose. Carburetor.
*993,770. May 30, 1911. Fritz. Car buretor.

AERON AUIles.

*998,123. July 18, 1911. Scaife. Carburetor.
*1,001,950. Aug. 29, 1911. Hart. Carburetor.
*1,002,699. Sept. 5, 1911. Jouffret & Re n~e . Carburetor.
*1,002,700. Sept. 5, 1911. Jouffret & Renee. Carburetor.
*1,006,130. Oct. 17, 1911. Riotte. Vaporizer.
*1,006,387. Oct. 17, 1911. Kreis. Carburetor.
*1,006,411. Oct. 17, 1911. Scott. Carburetor.
*1,010,051. Nov. 28, 1911. Hoffman. Carburetor.
*1,010,066. Nov. 28, 1911. Newcomb. Carburetor.
*1,010,116. Nov. 28, 1911. Carter. Carburetor.
*1,011,694. Dec. 12, 1911. Winton. Carburetor.
*1,011,696. Dec. 12, 1911. Winton. Carburetor.
*1,011,960. Dec. 19, 1911. Ionides. Carburetor.
*1,014,551. J an. 9, 1912. Winton. Carburetor.
*1,016,108. J an. 30, 1912. Steinbrenner. Carburetor.
*1,018,262. Feb. 20, 1912. Teal. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,021,547. Mar. 26, 1912. Motsinger. Carburetor.
*1,022,702. Apr. 9, 1912. Rothe. Carburetor.
1,022,703. Apr. 9, 1912. Rothe. Carburetor.
*1,037,993. Sept. 10, 1912. Romans. Carburetor.
*1,038,040. Sept. 10, 1912. Weiss. Carburetor.
*1,040,414. Oct. 8, 1912. Rettig. Carburetor.
*1,040,619. Oct. 8, 1912. Carter. Carburetor.
*1,041,481. Oct. 15, 1912. Kaley . Carburetor.
*1,046,014. Dec. 3, 1912. Ratcliff. Carburetor.
*1,046,434. Dec. 10, 1912. Bolee. Carburetor.
*1,048,518. Dec. 31,1912. Fritz. Priming deYice for carburetor s.
*1,049,705. Jan. 7, 1913. Greuter. Carburetor.
*1,051,041. Jan. 21, 1913. White. Carburetor.
*1,061,835. May 13, 1913. Gobbi. Carburetor.
*1,063,148. May 27, 1913. Anderson. Carburetor.
*1,065,912. June 24, 1913. Binon. Carburetor.
*1,065,977. July 1, 1913. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,069,817. Aug. 12, 1913. Schultz. Carburetor.
*1,072,733. Sept. 9, 1913. Kaltenbach. Carburetor.
*1073,179. Sept. 16, 1913. Sprung. Carburetol·.
*1,074,574. Sept. 30, 1913. Riotte. Carburetor.
*1,074,575. Sept. 30, 1913. Riotte. Carburetor.
*1,074,577. Sept. 30, 1913. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,078,349. Nov. 11, 1913. Hawzhurst & Nicolai. Carbureting device.
*1.078,5 2. Nov. 11, 1m3. Jaugey. Carburetor.
1,079,634. Nov. 25, 1913. Burchartz. Carburetor.
*1,080,118. Dec. 2, 1913. 1\1ono mith. Carburetor.
*1,080,815. Dec. 9, 1913. EYerest. Carberetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,08 ,091. Feb. 24, 1914. Raymond. Carburetor.
*1,089,0 9. Mar. 3, 1914. Stamp. Carburetor:
*1,089,105. Mar. 3, 1914. B es om & Anderson. Carburetor.
*1,089,372. Mar. 3, 1914. Baverey. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,0 9,524. Mar. 10, 1914. Barrett & Wilson. Carburetor.
*1,090,047. Mar. 10, 1914. Goudard & 1I1ennesson. Carburetor.
*1,090,208. Mar. 17, 1914. Heitger. Carburetor.
"'1,093,343. Apr. l 'J. 1914. McAnr'\rews.
'arl:lul·etor.
*1,094,674. Apr. 2 , 1914. Miller & Adamson. Carburetor.
*1,099,293. June 9, 1914. Goldberg & Tillot on. Carburetor.
1,099,828. June 9, 1914. Tatom. Carburetor.
*1,100,679. June 16, 1914. McGuire. Carburetor.
>1"1,101,869. June 30, 1914. McGuire. Carburetor.
*1,103,930. July 21, 1914. Bennett. Carburetor.
*1,104,560. July 21, 1914. Shoobridge & Gunstone. Carburetor.
1,106,192. Aug. 4, 1914. Crouan. Carbnretor.
*1,108,245. Aug. 25, 1914. Scbebler. Carburetor.
*1,109,974. Sept. 8, 1914. Fagard. Carburetor for internal-combustion engine.

"1 .112,374. Sept. 29, 1914. Livingston . Carburetor.
*1-,113,221. Oct. 13, 1914. Krause Carburetor.

AERONAUTICS.

89

*1,113,551. Oct. 13, 1914. Greuter. Carburetor.
1,115,632. Nov. 3, 1914. Weiss. Device for regulating supplemental supply of
fnel mixtures and air to internal-combustion engine .
*1,116,023. Nov. 3, 1914. Crawford . Carburetor.
*1,119,076. Dec. 1, 1914. Frey. Carburetor.
*1,120,183. Dec. 8, 1914. Duff. Carburetor.
*1,120,184. Dec. 8, 1914. Duff. Carburetor.
*1,120,185. Dec. 8, 1914. Duff. Carburetor.
*1,122,571. Dec. 29, 1914. Binks. Carburetor.
*1,123,469. Jan. 5, 1915. Bennett. Carburetor.
*1,124,697. Jan. 12, 1915. Carter. Keedle-yalve operating mechanism for carburetors.
*1,125,069. Jan. 19, 1915. Coulter. Carburetor.
*1,125,368. Jan. 19, 1915. Mono mith. Carburetor.
*1.12 ,773. Feb. 16, 1915. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1.130.350. Mar. 2, 1915. Thompson. Carburetor.
*1.130,474. Mar. 2, 1915. Bru b. Carburetor.
*1,130,490. Mar. 2, 1915. Delaunay-Belleville. Carburetor.
*1,130,700. Mar. 9,' 1915. Bennett. Carburetor.
*1,130.950. Mar. 9, 1915. Williams. Carburetor.
*1,133,904. Mar. 30, 1915. Wyman. Carburetor.
*1,134,942. Apr. 6, 1915. Be. som & Anderson. Carburetor .
*1,135.211. Apr. 13, 1915. Schiedelmecht. Carburetor.
*1,143.986. June 22, 1915. Muir. Carburetor.
*1,144,206. June 22, 1915. Juhasz. Carburetor.
*1,145,824. July 6, 1915. Udale. Carburetor.
*1,146.150. July 13, 1915. Gardner. Visible carburetor.
*1,147.337. July 20, 1915. Muir. Carburetor.
*1,147,940. July 27, 1915. Griffin. Carburetor.
*1,148,378. July 27, 1915. Grapin. Carburetor.
*1,148,485. July 27, 1915. Gallagher. Carburetor.
*1,149,291. Aug. 10, 1915. Richard. Carburetor.
*1,151,778. Aug. 31, 1915. FUl1clerburk. Carburetor.
*1,152,031. Aug. 31, 1915. Lobdell. Carburetor.
*1,152.173. Au"'. 31, 1915. Hau "'ele. Carburetor.
*1,153,487. Sept. 14, 1915. Greiner. Carburetor.
*1,155,457. Oct. 5, 1915. Wetterhahn. Carburetor.
*1,156,084. Oct. 12, 1915. Kimmell. Carburetor.
*1,157,146. Oct. 19, 1915. CarTel. Pres 'ure ca.rburetor.
*1,158,589. Nov. 2, 1915. Thurot. Carburetor.
*1,159,167.
TOV. 2, 1915.
Breeze. Carburetor.
*1,159.851.
ov. 9, 1915. McCurdy. Carburetor.
*1,162.041. r ov. 30, 1915. Cunningham. Carburetor.
*1.162,308.
ov. 30, 1915. Pond. Carbm·etor.
*1,162,680. Nov. 30, 1915. Buick. Carburetor.
*1,163,223. Dec. 7, 1915. Depp(\. Carburetor.
*1.164,661. Dec. 21, 1915. Muir. Carburetor.
*1,] 26,159. Jan. 26, 1915. Dressel. Floatless carburretor.
*1,166,308. Dec. 28, 1915. Arquembourg. Carburetor.
*1,16 ,513. J a n. 18, 1916. Kingston. Carburetor.
*1,169.616. Jan. 25, 1916. Carter. Carburetor.
*1,170,348. Feb. 1, 1916. Schi.1ttler. Starting and idle-r unning device for jet
carburetors.
*1.170,416. Feb. 1, 1916. Claucle!. Carburetor.
*1,170.417. Feb. I, 1916. Clauclel. Carburetor.
*1,171,074. Feb. 8, 1916. Stt·oud. Carburetor.
*1,172.031. Feb. 15. ] 916. Morand. Carburetor.
*1,172,701. Feb. 22, 1916. Gardner. Carburetor.
*1,173,246. F eb. 29, 1916. Boettcher. Carburetor.
*1,175,536. Mar. 14, 1916. Longuemare. Carburetor.
*1,176.516. Mar. 21, 1916. Boyce. Carburetor.
*1,176,627. Mar. 21, 1916. Vel' Planck. Carburetor.
*1.176,651. Mar. 21, 1916. Chatain. Carburetor.
*1,177,624. Apr. 4, 1916. Hil!. Carburetor.
*1,178,832. Apr. 11, 1916. Augustine. Fluid -mixing device.
*1,179,381. Apr. 11, 1916. Sunderman. Carburetor.

90

AERONAUTICS.

*1,180,483. Apr. 25, 1916. Fogolin. Carburetor.
*1,180,518. Apr. 25, 1916. Mal trom & Ander en. Carburetor.
*1,180,976. Apr. 25, 1916. Cloudsley. Carburetor.
*1,181,128. May 2, 1916. Fritz. Automatic priming device for carburetors.
*1,183,019. May 16, 1916. McGuire. Carburetor.
*1,183,081. May 16, 1916. Krueger. Carburetor.
*1,183,183. May 16, 1916. Funderburk Combined dash adjustment and primer
for carburetors.
*1,183,222. May 16, 1916. Miller. Carburetor.
*1,183,294. May 16, 1916. Gille. Carbur trr.
*1,183,587. May 16, 1916. Parkin. Carburetor.
"'1,183,673. May 16, 1916. Robertson. Carburetor.
*1,184,267. May 23, 1916. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,184,923. May 30, 1916. Carter. Carburetor.
*1,185,016. May 30, 1916. Spiller. Carburetor.
*1,185,492. May 30, 1916. Finch. Carburetor.
*1,190,573. July 11, 1916. Nedoma. Carburetor.
"'Re.12,611. Feb. 19, 1907. Sturtevant. Double carburetor for explosive engines.
*Re. 13,580. June 24, 1913. Fritz. Priming device for cari)uretors.
*1,186,371. June 6, 1916. Baverey. Carburetor.
*1,187,463. June 13, 1916. Merriam. Carburetor.
*1,188,390. June 27, 1916. Baverey. Carburetor.
"'Re. 14,045. Jan. 11, 1916. HefUer. Carburetor.

Cross·reference patents, class 48, subclass 150.S.
710,841
842,261
844,894

961,423
991,152
1,038,921

1,055,352
1,069,502
1,096,482

1,098,164
1,107,849
1,115,951

1,116,673
1,119,078

1,120,763
1,145,138

•
1,158,494
1,177,318

SlJllCLASS 151, CA.RBlJllETORS, OIL FEED, FLOAT VAL>ES.

45,729. Jan. 3, 1865. McDouga ll. Improved apparatus for carbureting ga es.
55,324. June 5, 1866. McDougall. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
57,551. Aug. 28, 1866. Myel'. Improved apparatus for generating illuminating
gas.
59,142. Oct. 23, 1866. Smith. Feeder for carburetor.
80,268. July 28, 1868. Boon & Perry. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas
and air.
107,853. Oct. 4, 1868. Bartlett. Improvement in gas carburetors.
127,039. May 21, 1872. Fish. Improvement in carburetol·s.
131,815. Oct. 1, 1872. Drake. Improvement in apparatu for carbureting air
and gas.
140,998. July 22, 1873. Fischer. Improvement in carburetor.
154,475. Aug. 25, 1874. Grime.. Improvement in ga ·carbureting machines.
156,142. Oct. 20, 1874. DiIlon. Improvement in ga machines for carbureting
air.
156,463. Nov. 3, 1874. Marks. Improvement in carburetors.
158,184 Dec. 29, 1874. Porter. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air and gas.
160,690. Mar. 2, 1875. Lockwood. Improvement in carburetors.
162,848. May 4, 1875. Ofeldt. Improvement in gas apparatus for carburet·
ing air.
J64,360. June 15, 1875. Bean. Improvement in carburetors.
166,476. Aug. 10, 1875. Porter. Improvement in gas carburetors.
168,048. Sept. 21, 1876. Porter & Grimes. Improvement in air and gas carburetors.
176,156. Apr. 18, 1876. Wiggin. Improvement in carburetors.
176,156. Apr. 18, 1876. Wiggin. Improvement in carburetors.
177,104. May 9, 1876. Deeds. Improvement In carburetors.
186,302. Jan. 16, 1877. Boomer & Randall. Improvement in gas and air car·
buretors.
J89,645. Apr. 17, 1877. Palmer. Improvement in carburetors.
193,232. July 17, 1 77. Drake. Improvement in carburetors.
193,911. Aug. 7, 1877. Bang. Improvement in carburetor.
198,657. Dec. 25, 1877. Merritt. Improvement in regulated valves for car·
buretors.

ARRON AUTICS.

91

"l!J9,055. Jan. 8, 1878. Gray. Improrement in feed regulators for carburetors.
199,781. Jan. 29, 1878. Bradley. Improvement in carburetot·s.
199,928. Feb. 5, 1878.
' elon. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
206,196. July 23, 1878. Porter. Carburetor.
207,886. Sept. 10, 1878. Miner. Improvement in carburetors.
2]3,351. Mar. 18, 1879. Roth. Improvement in carburetors.
222,822. Dec. 23, 1879. Howard. Improvement in gas carburetors.
226,875. Apr. 27, 1880. Palmer. Gas carburetor.
233,978. Nov. 2, 1880. Burrows. Carbm'eting apparatus.
248,750. Oct. 25, 1881. Huo-hes. Gas carburetor.
280,746. July 3, 1 1. Jackson. Metrical carburetor.
288, 68. Nov. 20, 1883. Sauderson. Carburetor.
291,676. Jan. 8, 1884. Burrows. Apparatus for carbureting air.
R01,790. July 8, 1884. Bagger. Carburetor.
303,927. Aug. 19, 1884. Froll. Carburetor.
308,886. Dec. 9, 1884. Engli Il. Apparatus for carbureting air or gases.
312,289. Feb. 17, 1885. Palmer. Air or gas carburetor.
317,686. May 12, 1885. Symons. Gas carburetor.
336,378. Feb. 16, 18 6. Bennett. Automatic gas generator.
340,221. Apr. 20, 1886. Lawrence. Carburetor.
353,311.
0'1". 30, 1886. Keller. Carburetor.
390,037. Sept. 25, 1888. Ruckle & Wolters. Carburetor.
395,152. Dec. 25, 1888. • Lawrence. Carburetor.
403,377. May 14, 1889. Rogers & Wharry. Carburetor for gas engines.
427,225. May 6, 1890. Cooper. Carburetor.
528,882. Nov. 6, 1894. Keller. Carburetor.
575,901. Jan. 26, 1897. McKnight. Gasolene-gas machine.
583,126. May 25, 1 97. Ry(ler. Carburetor.
583,818. June 1, 1897. Redmon. Carburetor.
586,923. July 20, 1897. Aldrich. Apparatus for manufacturing gas.
587,867. Aug. 10, 1897. Shaver. Carburetor.
G95,658. Dec. 14, 1897. Seitz. Carburetor.
603,431. May 3, 1898. Pinckney. Carburetor.
607,888. July 26, 1898. Smith. Carburetor.
607,889. July 26, 1 98. Smith. Carburetor.
618,108. Jan. 24, 1899. Lamb. Carburetor.
623,725. Apr. 25, 1899. Lan"e. Carburetor.
626,193. May 30, 1 99. Small. Cm·buretor.
629,246. J uly 18, 1899. Grau. Carburetor.
639,336. Dec. 19, 1899. An on. Carburetor.
6-10,695. J an. 2, 1900. Parrott. Carburetor.
646,320. Mar. 27, 1900. Selzer. Carburetor.
657,770. Sept. 11, 1900. H edriclc. Carburetor.
663,683. Dec. 11, 1900. Royal. Carburetor.
685,787. Nov. 5, 1901. Myel'. Carburetor.
6 8,776. Dec. 10, 1901. Greenamyer. Carburetor.
68 ,931. Dec. 17, 1901. Carter & Zierlein. Carburetor.
690,303. Dec. 31, 1901. Legge. Carbui·etor.
697,507. Apr. 15, 1902. Electrical condenser.
701,890. June 10, 1902. Keller. Carburetor.
706,454. Aug. 5, 1902. Robinson. Cal·buretor.
706,600. Aug. 12, 1902. Rush. Carburetor.
707,467. Aug. 19, 1902. Walther. Carburetor.
727,161. May 5, 1903. Leckband. Apparatus for carbureting air.
746,173. Dec. 8, 1903. Sayre. Carburetor.
754,774. Mar. 15, 1904. Jas. Carburetor.
828,334. Aug. 14, 1906. Peterson. Carburetor.
832,330. Oct. 2, 1906. Morrison. Carburetor.
844,996. Feb. 19, 1907. Colbath. Carburetor.
871,480. Nov. 19, 1907. Cornish. Carburetor.
885,832. Apr. 28, 1908. Breiding. Carburetor.
886,403. May 5, 1908. Puddington. Carburetor.
931,3 6. Aug. 17, 1909. Colbath. Carburetor.
954,258. Apr. 5, 1910. Colbath. AutomatiC valve for carburetors, etc.
Re. 6,865. Jan. 18, 1876. Porter & Gr imes. I mprovement in air and gas
carburetors.

92

AERON AUTIOS.
Oro88-reference patent8, cla88 48, 8ubcLa88 151.

50,076
57,788
57,812
63,667
85,104
103,036
109,568
125,194
135,020

148,602
151,392
166,427
174,851
176,349
1 0,061
183,884
19 ,731
204,974

211,306
234,955
236,159
238,757
245,443
246,601
262,991
280,747
308,877

350,382
493,165
509,174
522,574
559,341
568,672
575,901
5 3,126
593,284

604,948
654,686
720,485
742,920
763,965
780,673
781,701
783,648
796,557

829,375
844,995
853,196
860,334
870,052
883,171
8 6,526
900,731
951,501

989,848
989,980
1,009,121
1,070,394

SUBCLASS 152, C.!.RBUllETOR, OIL FEED, PUMPS.

169,843. Nov. 9, 1875. Rand. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
439,579. Sept. 15, 1891. Hargreaves et al. Carburetor.
576,499. Feb. 2, 1897. Ran. om. Gas apparatus.
622,008. Mar. 28, 1899. Kemp. Carburetor.
625,294. May 16, 1899. Egan. Carburetor.
646,780. Apr. 3, 1900. Wood. Carburetor .
665,568. Jan. 8, 1901. Kemp. Gas-generating apparatus.
670,599. Mar. 26, 1901. Tenney. Carbu r etor.
689,004. Dec. 17, 1901. Kemp. Carburetor.
692,518. Feb. 4, 1902. Jack. Carburetor.
712,803. Nov. 4, 1902. John on. Carbmetor.
731,137. June 16, 1903. Speer. Carbureting apparatus.
743,439. Nov. 10, 1903. Bower. Carburetor feed.
745,489. Dec. 1, 1903. Goslee. Carburetor.
762,477. June 14, 1904. Garde. Apparatus for carbureting air.
780,355. Jan. 17, 1905. Kelley. Carburetor.
927,558. July 13, 1904. Laux. Carbmetor.
*1,119,479. Dec. 1, 1914. Veeder. Carburetor.
*1,149,323. Aug. 10, 1915. Baker & Swan. Apparatus for feeding fuel to oil
engines.
*1,153,077. Sept. 7, 1915. Nippel. Carburetor.
1,164,093. Dec. 14, 1915. Houghton & Hall. Carburetor.
C1'oss-reter'ence patents, class 48, SllbclCb88 152.

596,658
620,595
625,084

673,542
714,414

735,011
767,485

831,374
841,779

959,350
1,022,451

1,048,083
1,080,471

1,150,115
1,166,595

SUBCLASS 153, CARBUBETORS, OIL FEED, ROTARY.

49,448. Aug. 15, 1865. Simonds. Impro'l'ed apparatus for carbureting air.
57,940. Sept. 11, 1 66. McAvoy. I mproved apparatus for carbureting air.
65,296. May 28, 1867. Steven. Imp~'oved apparatus for carbureting air.
68,666. Sept. 10, 1867. Stevens. Improved combination apparatus for carbureting air.
82,244. Sept. 15, 1868. Plass. Improved apparatus for carburetin ~ air.
85,972. Jan. 19, 1869. Steiner. Improved "'as generator.
87,556. Mar. 9, 1869. Foster & Ganster. Improved gas apparatus.
97,122. Nov. 23, 1869. Root & Cu tel'. Improved portable gas apparatus and
carburetor.
102,784. May 10, 1870. Doty. Improvement in gas generators.
127,366. May 28, 1872. Pierson. Improvement in carburetors.
133.057. Dec. 17, 1872. Terry. Improvement in carburetors.
138,409. Apr. 29, 1873. Judd & Doty. I mprovement in apparatus for carbureting air.
140,711. July 8, 1873. Judd & Pierson. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
153,876. Aug. 4, 1874. Wil on et al. Improyement in carbureting apparatus_
155,297. Sept. 22, 1874. Denny & Pier on. Improvement in air carburetors.
168,290. Sept. ~8, 1875. Schiissler. Improvement in hydrocarbon-gas apparatus.

93

AERONAUTICS.

189,490. Apr. 10, 1877. Paquette. Improvement in carburetors.
193,034. July 10, 1877. Pierson. I mprovement in carbureting machines.
206,402. July 30, 1878. Paquelin. Improvement in carburetin g apparatus.
*249,363. Nov. 8, 18 1. Jackson. Metrical carburetor.
275,268. Apr. 3, 1883. Ransom. Apparatus for carbureting gas.
280,747. July 3, 1883. Jackson. Metrical r egulator for distributing hydro.carbon liquid to gas or air.
308,877. Dec. 9, 1884. Copeland. Automatic hydrocarbon·feeding apparatus
for carburetors.
309,466. Dec. 16, 1884. Jackson. Bucket for measuring wheels of carburetors.
368,660. Aug. 23, 1887. English & Stubbers. Gas machine.
429,271. Juue 3, 1 90. Hambleton. Apparatus for measuring and carbureting
air or gas.
{)40,536. June 4, 1895. Coleman. Gasoline-gas machine.
564,429. July 21, 1896. Kemp. Air-gas machine.
632,377. Sept. 5, 1 99. Stanley. Carburetor.
683,751. Oct. 1, 1901. Guy. Carburetor.
691.955. Jan. 28, 1902. Martenette. Carbur etor.
692,860. Feb. 11, 1902. Kemp. Carburetor.
738,604. Sept. 8, 1903. Canissimo et a1. Carbureting apparatus.
795,233. July 18, 1905. Poole. Carbureting machine.
796,719. Aug. 8, 1905. Guy. Oil feed for carburetors.
1,137,536. Apr. 27, 1915. Schmidt. Carbureting apparatus.
Re. 10,358. July 17, 1883. Paquelin. Carbureting apparatus.
C)'oss-ref er ence 1)atents, class

56,116

59,474

308,796

733,444

48,

subclass 153.

743,085

750,311

1,109,085

SUBCLASS 154, CARBUBETORS, OIL FEED, SPRAY.

46,976. Mar. 21, 1 65. Simonds. Impro\'ed apparatus for carbureting air.
48,391. June 27, 1865. Hainsworth. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
61,033. Jan. 8, 1867. Williams. Improved method of carbureting gas.
274,176. Mar. 20, 1883. Copelancl. Carburetor.
316,033. Apr. 21, 1885. Hayes. Apparatus for carbureting and odorizing
na tural gas.
348,917. Sept. 7, 1886. Kniese. Carburetor to be used in the manufacture of
water gas.
404,428. June 4, 1889. Paine. Oil burner.
432,270. July 15, 1 90. Hargrea\'es et a1. Carbm·etor.
534,861. Feb. 26, 1895. Cornish. Carburetor.
550,776. Dec. 3, 1895. Bourgeois. Carburetor.
635,894. Oct. 31, 1899. Kemp. Carburetor.
655,172. July 31, 1900. Olds &, Hough. Carburetor.
660,778. Oct. 30, 1900. Lambert. Mixer and vaporizer for gas engines.
662,024. Nov. 20, 1900. Rey. Carburetor.
662,514. Nov. 27, 1900. Wiinsche. Carburetor.
709,647. Sept. 23, 1902. Ro enberry. Carburetor.
714,414. Nov. 28, 1902. Tenney. Carburetor.
742,774. Oct. 27, 1903. Chamberlain. Mixer for hydrocarbon engines.
742,920. Nov. 3, 1903. Smith. Carburetor for explosion engines.
754,178. Mar. 8, 1904. Weber. Carburetor.
840,708. Jan. 8, 1907. Pan-ott. Carburetor.
843,692. Feb. 12, 1907. Norton. Device for generating gas from crude oil.
852,780. May 7, 1907. Ellis. Automatic gasoline-gas machine.
881,431. Mar. 10, 1908. Meyers & Hickey. Apparatus for carbureting air.
906,940. Dec. 15, 1908. Schmitt & Neumann. Gas machine.
*1,115,951. Nov. 3, 1914. Martin. Carburetor.
*1,119,076. Dec. 1, 1914. Frey. Carburetor.
*1,120,128. Dec. 8, 1914. Browne. Carburetor.
*1,120,573. Dec. 8, 1914. WebbeL·. Carburetor.
*1,190.540. July 11, 1916. Gettelman. Carburetor.
Re. 2,785. Oct. 22, 1867. Stuart. Improvement in carbureting gases.

• •

94

..

AERON AUTICS.

O"os8-?'eterence patents, cLass 4-8, subcLass 154-.
83,748

189,645

247,390

405,747

148,579
176,156
176,395

199,781
203,505
206,402

251,673
288,622
288,868

427,197
459,579
564,429

SUBCLASS 154.1,

C~BUBETORS,

646,780

760.247

673,542
688,931
712,803

852,685
931,386
957,731

1,116,325

OIL FEED, SUCTION-CONTROLLED VALVE.

*423,214. Mar. 11, 1890. Butler. Hydrocarbon motor.
*498,447. May 30, 1893. Rolfson. Carburetor.
*500,401. June 27, 1893. Lehmann. Mixing valve for petroleum or other
motors.
*509,828. Nov. 20, 1893. Rolfson. Carburetor.
*515,050. Feb. 20, 1894. Hoyt. Carbureting apparatus for gas or vapor engines.
*556,069. Mar. 10, 1 96. Sintz. Carburetor.
*567,253. Sept. 8, 1 96. Pratt. Vaporizer and mixer for gasoline engines.
*578,683. Mar. 9, 1 97. r.rregurtha. Vaporizer.
"609,557. Aug. 23, 1898. Phelps. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon oils.
*611,341. Sept. 27, 1898. Starr & Cogswell. Mixer anel vaporizer for explosive engine ..
• 633,800. Sept. 26, 1899. Casgrain. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*649,191. May 8, 1900. Alderson. Carbureting and gas-mixing apparatus.
*670,921. Mar. 26, 1901. Olds. Carburetor.
*679.3 7. July 30, 1901. Mathieu. Carbureting apparatus for explosion motors.
*680.572. Aug. 13, 1901. Dyer. Vaporizer for explo iYe engines.
*6 0,961. Aug. 20, 1901. Buffum. Carburetor for explosiye engines.
*688,367. Dec. 10, 1901. Tregurtha. Yaporizer for gasoline engines.
*690,112. Dec. 31, 1901. Kull. Carburetor or mix ing valve for explosive
engine.
*694,708. Mar. 4, 1902. White. Vaporizer for explo h-e engines.
*703,937. July 1, 1902. Lizotte. Vaporizer for explo ive engines.
"705,995. July 29, 1902. Graves. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*714,982. Dec. 2, 1902. Widmayer et a1. Generator or mixing valve.
*715,398. Dec. 9, 1902. Longuemare. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*717,000. Dec. 30, 1902. Henroid. Internal-combustion engine or motor.
*722,357. Mar. 10, 1903. Davi. Carburetor for ""as engines.
*724,328. Mar. 31, 1903. Pivert. Mixing valve for explosion engines.
*727,476. May 5, 1903. Starr & Cogswell. Mixer for explosive gaSOline engines.
*729,254. lI:lay 26, 1903. Bates. Carbureting device for explosive engines.
*730,608. June 9, 1903. Brush. Carbureting device for internal-combustio'n
ena-ines.
*731,218. June 16, 1903. Perkins. Vaporizer for internal-combu tion engines.
*732,016. June 23, 1903. Uhlin. Explosive-engine governor.
""741,224. Oct. 13, 1903. Clark. Carburetor for explosh'e engines.
*741,959. Oct. 20, 1903. Emery. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
*746, 33. Dec. 15, 1903. H en negin. Fuel regulator for gasoline motors.
*747,235. Dec. 15, 1903. Saris. Carburetor for liquid-fuel engines.
*760,673. May 24, 1904. White & Duryea. Vaporizer fo r explosive engines.
*761,392. May 31, 1904. Olds. Carburetor for explo ive engines.
*791,1.92. May 30, 1905. Haynes. Carburetor for explosion engines.
*806,079. Nov. 29, 1905. Gavelek. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*807,479. Dec. 19, 1905. Mason. Carburetor.
*816,477. Mar. 27, 1906. Kellog. Carburetor.
*820,408. May 15, 1906. Carllus. Vaporizing device for internal-combustion
engines.
*826,531. July 24, 1906. Briest. Carburetor.
*826,787. July 24, 1906. Kemp. Carburetor.
*839,707. Dec. 25, 1906. Biehen. Carbu retor.
*842,429. Jan. 29, 1907. Schuyler. Carburetor for explosion engines.
*848,425. Mar. 26, 1907. Anderson. Carburetor for gasoline engines.
"'850,223. Apr. 17, 1907. Hallett. Carburetor.
*863,516. Aug. 13, 1907. Downing. Carburetor.
*866,490. Sept. 17, 1907. Lewis. Carburetor.
"-871,730. Nov. 19, 1907. McHardy. Carburetor.

~----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---

AERONAUTICS.
~876,210. J an. 7, 1908. Miller. Carburetor.
"'8 6,545. May 5, 1908. Scheblel·. Carburetor.
*' 8.263. May 19, 1908. R ader. Carburetor.
"890,099. June 9, 1908. Richardson. Carburetor.
*892,155. June 30, 1908. Hodges. Carburetor.
*896,388. Aug. 18, 1908. Johnston. Carburetor.
"903,206. Nov. 10, 1908. Lauson. Mixing valve.
*904,659. Nov. 24, 1908. Thompson. Carburetor.
*909,490. J a n. 12, 1909. Westaway. Carburetor.
*911,967. F eb. 9, 1909. Fox. Carburetor.
*912,998. F·e b. 23, 1909. Eckert. Carburetor.
*912.999. F eb. 23, 1909. Eckert. Carburetor.
*913,313. F eb. 23, 1909. Slaughter. Carbtll'etor for explosive motors.
*915,684. Ma r. 16, 1909. Leinau. Carburetor.
*917.125. Apr. 6, 1909. Pierce. Carburetor.
"918,607. Apr. 20, 1909. Sturges. Carbur etor.
*922.374. May 18, 1909. Wri gh t. Mixer and vaporizer.
*926,848. July 6, 1909. Carlson. Carburetor.
*930,443. Aug. 10, 1909. Vaughan & McKensie. Carburetor.
*936,064. Oct. 5, 1909. Westaway. Carburetor.
*93 ,894. Nov. 2, 1909. Rapp. Carburetor.
"939, 56. Nov. 9, 1909. Papanti. Carburetor.
*941,406 Nov 30, 1909. Cooper. Carburetor.
~944, 11. Dec. 28, 1909. Nageborn. In ternal-combustion engine.
*946,632. Jan. 18, 1910. Bassford. Carburetor.
"'948,977. Feb. 8, 1910. Kin g. bury. Carbmetol·.
*930,423. Feb. 22, 1910. Ande r on & Mot. Carburetor.
*951,002. l\Ia r. 1, 1910. Grott. Carburetor.
*952.326. Mar. 18, 1910. Hagar. Carburetor.
'955,222. Apr. 10, 1910. Stocker. Carburetor.
955,353. Apr. 19, 1910. ParI;:. Carburetor.
*955,956. Apr. 26, 1910. Ennis. Carburetor.
*962,649. June 28, 1910. Miller. Carburetor.
*963, 04. July 12, 1910. Peterson. Carbur etor.
*964,409. Jul y 12, 1910. Eckert. Carbureto r.
*964,831. July 19, 1910. Wynn. Carburetor.
*966,381. Aug. 9, 1910. Brooke. Carburetor.
*971,038. Sept. 27, 1910. Gulick. Carburetor.
"971,862. Oct. 4, 1910. Schebler. Carburetor.
*973, 82. Oct. 25, 1910. Rothe. Carbu retor.
*974,033. Oct. 25, 1910. Daniel. Carburetor.
976, 81. Nov. 29, 1910. I vor. Carburetor.
*976,911. Nov. 29, 1910. Petersen & Pettit. Carburetor.
*978.076. Dec. 6, 1910. Tilden. Carburetor.
*97 ,787. Dec. 13, 1910. Smith. Carburetor.
*97 ,947. Dec. 20, 1910. Shaw. Carburetor.
*979,409. Dec 27, 1910. Barker. Carburetor.
*979,555. Dec. 27, 1910. Peterson. Carburetor.
*9 1,853. Jan. 17, 1911. H alladay. Carburetor.
*984,109. Feb. 14, 1911. Sailer. Carburetor.
*9 4,874. Feb. 21, 1911. Winton. Carburetor.
986,572. Mar. 14, 1911. IVOl·. Carbur etor.
*988,502. Apr. 4, 1911. P etre. Carburetor.
*988,659. Apr. 4, 1911. Phinney. Carburetor.
*993.096. May 23, 1911. Noyes. Gas and liquid mixer .
*993,210. May 23, 1911. Weiss. Carburetor.
*994.191. June 6, 1911. P eter on. Carburetor.
*994,195. June 6, 1911. Prescott. Carburetor.
*994,886. June 13, 1911. Swanberg. Generator valve for gaSOline engine.
*995,623. June 20, 1911. Miller. Cat·buretor.
*997,417. July 11, 1911. Rothe. Carburetor.
*998,993. July 25, 1911. Skinner. Carbureting apparatus.
*999,033. July 25, 1911. Hubbard. Motive-fluid-supply valve.
*999.686. Au g. 1, 1911. W esta,vay. Carburetor.
*1.000,398. Aug. 15, 1911. Gentle. Carburetor.
*1,001,847. Aug. 29, 1911. Hobbs. Carburetor.
*1,003,101. Sept. 12, 1911. Gumz. Carburetor.

95

--- ---

96

ABRON AUTICS.

*1,004,091. Sept. 26, 1911. Shain. Carburetor for gas engines.
*1,007,659. Oct. 31, 1911. Rice. Carburetor.
*1,009,252. Nov. 21, 1911. Mallo. Carbu retor.
*1,010,003. Nov. 2 ,1911. Schulz. Carburetor .
*1,010,184. Nov. 28, 1911. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,010,1 5. Nov. 28, 1911. Schulz. Carburetor.
*1,014,319. Jan. 9, 1912. Miller. Carburetor.
*1,014,682. Jan. 16, 1912. Weld. Carburetor.
*1,016,169. Jan. 30, 1912.
agel. Carburetor.
1,019, 00. Mar. 12, 1912. Kennedy. Carburetor.
*1,020,270.
far. 12, 1912. Dunn. Carburetol-.
*1,025,816. May 7, 1912. Lofthouse & Booty. Carburetor.
1,027,769. May 2 ,1912. Roby. Carburetor.
*1,029,606. June 16, ]912. Guthrie. Valve mechanism for carburetors.
*1.029, 97. June 18, 1912. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,030,343. June 25, 1912. Stamps. Carbmetor.
*1,032,307. July 9, 1912. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1.032,547. July 16, 1912. Howarth. Carburetor.
*1,033,130. July 23, 1912. Underwood & Hill. Carburetor.
*1,036,536. Aug. 27, 1912. Atkins. Carburetor or mixer for internal-combustion engine.
*1,040,528. Oct. 8, 1912. Dock. Carburetor.
*1,042,017. Oct. 28, 1912. Long. Carburetor.
*1,044,314. Nov. 12, 1912. Watson. Carburetor.
*1,046,111. Dec. 3, 1912. Schultz. Carburetor.
*1,046,141. Dec. 3, 1912. Becker. Gas-mixing val,e for explosive engines.
*1,048,083. Dec. 24, 1912. La,ender. Carbureting device.
*1,04 .954. Dec. 31, 1912. Geor""e. Carburetor.
*1,049,31 . Dec. 31, 1912. Westaway. Carburetor.
*1,049,417. Jan. 7, 1913. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,049, 87. Jan. 7, 1913. Marsh. Carburetor.
*1,050,059. Jan. 7, 1913. Gould. Carburetor.
*1.051,440. Jan. 28, 1913. 0 tIer. Carburetor.
*1,059,501. Apr. 22, 1913. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,060,545. Apr. 29, 1913. Gentle. Carburetor.
*1,061,582. May 13, 1913. Clement. Carburetor.
*1,063,030. May 27, 1913. Heidelmann. Carburetor.
*1,064,867. June 17, 1913. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,066.0 O. July 1, 1913. Cole. Carburetor.
*1,067.351. July 15, 1913. Lavigne. Carburetor.
*1,067 ,623. July 15, 1913.
chulz. Carburetor.
*1,069,389. Aug. 5, 1913. Conklin. Carbmetor.
*1,071,003. Aug. 19, 1913. Drayton & Woodroffe. Carburetor.
1,074,575. Sept. 30, 1913. Riotte. Carburetor.
*1,077,256. Nov. 4, 1913. Brush. Carburetor.
*1.07 ,413. Nov. 11, 1913. Cahill. Carburetor.
*1,078.590.
rov. 11, 1913. Muir. Carburetor.
*1,07 ,591. No\,. 11, 1913. Luir. Carburetor.
*1,078,592.
ov. 11, 1913. Muir. Carburetor.
*1,079,947. Dec. 2, 1913. Morris. Carburetor.
*1,080,696. Dec. 9, 1913. Hugelet. Carburetor.
*1,081,222. Dec. 9, 1913. Diin. Carburetor.
*1,084,693. Jan. 20, 1914. Cahill. Carburetor.
*1,084,954. Jan. 20, 1914. Nice. Carbmetor.
*1,0 5,194. Jan. 27, 1914. Ru ian & Noble. Carburetor.
*1,086,359. Feb. 10, 1914. Faries. Carburetor for gas and gaSOline engines.
*1,087.187. Feb. 17, 1914. Schultz. Carburetor.
*1,087,21 . Feb. 17, 1914. Dalton & Conklin. Carburetor.
1,089,231. Feb. 24, 1914. Lawrence. Carburetor for internal-combustion en""ines.
*1.092,079. Mar. 31, 1914. Reeder. Carburetor.
*1,095,402. May 5, 19.10.4. J ordan. Carburetor.
*1,097,7 7. May 26, 1914. Brewer & Jone. Carburetor.
*1,103,864. July 14, 1914. Brown. Carburetor.
*1,104,494. July 21, 1914. Hamill. Carburetor.
*1,111.179. Sept. 22, 1914. Pratt. Carburetor.
*1,112,641. Oct. 6, 1914. Moeller. Fluicl mixing and regulating device.
*1,114,222. Oct. 20, 1914. Brigham. Carburetor.

97

AERONAUTICS.

*1,115,951. Nov. 3, 1914. Martin. Carburetor.
*1,120,128. Dec. 8, 1914. Browne. Carburetor.
*1,120,397. Dec. 8, 1914. Martin. Carburetor.
*1,120,573. Dec. 8, 1914. ' Vebber. Carburetor.
*1,123,048. Dec. 29, 1914. Wa hburn.. Carburetor.
*1,124,911. Jan. 12, 1915. J ohnsto n. Valve for gas engine.
*1,125,525. J an. 19, 1915. Rathcock. Carburetor.
*1,126,159. Jan. 26, 1915. Dressel. Floatles carbur etor.
*1,126,249. Jan. 26, 1915. Mitchell. Carburetor.
*1,126,690. Jan. , 1915. Beucus. Carburetor.
*1,130,228. Mar. 2, 1915. Whiting. Vaporizer for internal·combustion engines.
*1,132,934. Mar. 23, 1915. Heitger. Carburetor.
*1,135,270. Apr. 13, 1915. Duryea. Carburetor.
*1,135,689. Apr. 13, 1915. Harroun. Carburetor.
*1,137,727. May 4, 1915. Abernethy. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,137,728. May 4, 1915. Abernethy. Carburetor for vaporizer for explosive
engines.
*1,138,204. May 4, 1915. Folberth. Carburetor.
*1,139,914. l\lay 18, 1915. Smilie. Carburetor.
*1,140,525. May 25, 1915, l\lotSinger. Proportioning device especially deSigned for carburetors.
*1,141,085. l\lay 25, 1915. Kent. Carburetor.
*1,145,172. July 6, 1915. Speed. Carburetor.
*1,145. 54. July 6, 1915. Winkley & Hart. Carburetor for hydrocarbon
motors.
*1,145,871. July 6, 1915. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,146,181. July 13, 1915. Lippold. Ca rburetor.
*1,147,672. July 20, 1915. Bell. Carburetor.
*1.149,908. Aug. 10, 1915. GoudaI'd & Mennesson. Carburetor.
*1,156.823. Oct. 12, 1915. Schebler. Carburetor.
*1,15 ,324. Oct. 26, 1915. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,158,359. Oct. 26, 1915. Abell. Carburetor.
*1,159,005. Nov. 2, 1915. Funclerburk. Carbu retor.
*1,159,029. No\' . 2, 1915. Hodges. Carburetor.
*1,159,049. Nov. 2, 1915. Kirby. Carbur etor.
*1,161.374. Nov. 23, 1915. Bjorklund. Carburetor.
*1,165.359. Dec. 21, 1915. MotSinger. Carburetor.
"1,167.426. Jan. 11, 1916. Park. Carburetor.
*1.168,782. J an. 18, 1916. Bucker. Carburetor.
*1,169,574. Jan. 25, 1916. Schultz. Carburetor.
*1,17:1,,679. Feb. 15, 1916. Vellguth. Carburetor.
*1,171,716. Feb. 15, 1916. Haas. Carburetor.
*1,172,258. Feb. 22, 1916. Coulombe. Carbur eting mechanism for gas engines.
*1,172,595. Feb. 22, 1916. Heath & Taylor. Carburetor.
"1,178,064. Apr. 4, 1916. Fahrney. Carburetor.
*1,178,473. Apr. 4, 1916. Sunderman. Carburetor.
*1,178,866. Apr. 11, 1916. l\1 ieI'. Carburetor.
*1,179.568. Apr. 18, 1916. Schortt. Carburetor.
*1,179,913. Apr. 18, 1916. Hamill. Carburetor.
*1,181,356. May 2, 1916. Tjompson & Arkenberg. Carburetor.
*1,183,538. May 16, 1916. Collett. Carbur etor.
*1,184,696. May 23, 1916. Costa. Carburetor.
*1,192,106. July 15, 1916. Pembroke. Carburetor.
1,187,996. Jun e 20, 1916. Kapp. Carburetor.
*Re. 13,903 (orig. 7 3,902). Apr. 20, 1915. Shipman. Carburetor.
C1'o8s-1'eference patents, class 48, subclass 154,1.

938,894 1,022,326 1,065,503 1,116,673
975,696 1,023,470 1,074,575 1,119,076
976,237 1,038,050 1,082,007 1,119,078
976,409 1,042,004 1,086,226 1,130,350
995,919 1,052,051 1,101,736 1,130,474
1,020,198 1,061,995 1,108,245 1,130,502
72805 °-S. Doc. 559, 64-2--1

•

1,130,950
1,131,157
1,133,904
1,138, 29
1,140,000
1,143,779

1,147,337 1,166,173
1,148,247 1,167,217
1,155,407 1,168,783
1,156,836 1,173,762
1,162,680 Re. 13,580
1,164,661

98

AERONAUTICS.
S UBCLASS 155, CARBUBETOItS, ATOMIZERS.

49,934. Sept. 2, 1865. Terry. I mpr oved appar atus fo r carbureting air.
53,481. Mar . 27, 1866. Pond & Richurdson. Imp roved apparatus for carbureting air .
63,326. Mar. 26, 1867. St ephenson. Improved apparatus fo r carbureting gas
and ai r.
65,009. June 25, 1867. Bassett. Carburetor.
146,458. Jan. 13, 1874. Jiingling. Improyement in carbu retor.
]46,493. Jan. 13, 1874. Va quez. Improvement in carburetors.
228,547. June 8, 1880. Maxim. Gas apparatu .
238,757. Mar. 15, 1881. Brainard. Carburetor.
272,848. Feb. 27, 1883. Billings. Apparatus for manufacturing gas.
820,460. June 23, 1885. Copeland. Carburetor.
367,936. Aug. 9, 1887. Shaw. Hydrocarbon and gas-impulse feeder for gas
engines.
423,898. Mar. 25, 1890. Bradley. Air carburetor.
464,779. Dec. 8, 1891. Reichholm & Machlet. Apparatus fo r and method of
making fuel gas.
483,003. Sept. 20, 1892. Mendenhall. Apparatus for carbureting air.
485,877.
ov. 8, 1892. Noteman. Apparatus for making gas.
498,673. May 30, 1893. Mulvey. Appara tus for carbureting air.
509,174. Nov. 21, 1893. Lawrence. Apparatus for carbur eting gas.
576.108. Feb. 2, 1897. Gibson. Carburetor.
*581,930. May 4, 1897. Alderson. Gas mixer.
*593,911. Nov. 16, 1897. Snow. Vaporizing carburetor and air governor for
gas engine.
652,631. June 26, 1900. Pender. Carburetor.
"654,894. July 31, 1900. Hasbrouch. Regulator for gasoline or other like
engines.
*657,740. Sept. 11, 1900. Kiltz. Carburetor for gas engines.
"666,623. Jan. 22, 1901. Gebhart. Hydrocarbon vaporizer and mixer for
explo ion engines.
677,852. July 9, 1901. Brown & Donnelly. Carburetor.
678,194. July 9, 1901. Pickles. Carburetor.
702.378. J une 10, 1902. Roemisch & Orre. Carburetor.
"705,314. July 22, 1902. Blake. Carburetor.
"'706,050. Aug. 5, 1902. Hardy. Mixing valve for gas 01' gasoli ne engi nes.
713.983. Nov. 18, 1902. Heath. Carburetor for ~xplosive engines.
*721,238. Feb. 24, 1903. Rousseau. Vapor feeder and throttle for gas engines.
*725,741. Apr. 21, 1903. Miller. Fuel-feed regulator for explosive engines.
"726.191. Apr. 21, 1903. Readle. Vaporizing valve for explosive engines.
736,157. Aug. 11, 1903. Sams. AtomiZing and carbureting de\'ice.
758,789. May 3, 1904. Slining carburetor.
*761,192. May 31, 1904. Bean. Mixing and vaporizing device for motors.
*770,559. Sept. 20, 1904. Clay. Carburetor for explo ive engines.
>10793,498. June 27, 1905. Ash. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
797.615. Aug. 22, 1905. Schmitt. Carburetor.
*807,144. Dec. 12, 1905. Walker. Carburetor.
"817,721. Apr. 10, 1906. Lewis. Carburetor.
*827,094. July 31, 1906. Grant. Carburetor.
828,274. Aug. 7, 1906. Cornish. Carburetor.
828,940. Aug. 21, 1906. Lanard. Carburetor.
"836,764. :Nov. 27, 1906. H ea th. Carburewr.
846.395. Mar. 5, 1907. Busenbenz. Gas-manufacturing apparatus.
*856,638. June 11, 1907. Higgin. Carburetor.
857,130. June 18, 1907. Way. Carburetor.
861.758. July 30, 1907. McCanna. Carburetor.
864,037. Aug. 20, 1907. Selley. Carburetor .
.. 67,604. Oct. 8, 1907. Rothe. Ca rburetor.
878.297. Feb. 4, 1908. Levavasseur. Carburetor.
'·878,824. Feb. 11, 1908. Newbrough. Carburetor for explosive engines.
885,230. Apr. 21, 1908. Von Dulong. Apparatus for the production of gases
from hydrocarbon.
890,970. June 16, 1908. Dorr. Carbureting apparatus fot' explosive engines_
896.422. Aug. 18, 1908. Sylva. Carbureting and oil-separating apparatus.
'"905,012. Nov. 24, 1908. Spranger. Carburetor .

AERONAUTICS.

99

907,123. Dec. 22, 1908. Broderick. Carburetor.
*939,481. Nov. 9, 1909. Dickson. Carburetor.
940,652. Nov. 16, 1909. Nye. Carburetor.
*962,140. June 21, 1910. Hall & Dicks. Carburetor.
*968,215. Aug. 23, 1910. Westaway. Carburetor.
*973,937. Oct. 25, 1910. H a ines. Carburetor.
*974,076. Oct. 25, 1910. Kingston. Carburetor.
985,500. Feb. 28, 1911. Baujard. Carburetor.
*1,041,662. Oct. 15, 1912. Noyes. Vacuum fuel feeder and carburetor.
"'1,081,900. Dec. 16, 1913. Fagerberg. Engine primer.
1,104,222. July 21, 1914. Rimmer et aJ. Carburetor.
1,118, 97. Nov. 24, 1914. Dougherty. Means for carbureting air.
xl,127.120. Feb. 2, 1915. Veeder. Carburetor.
*1,141,258. Jlme I , 1915. Noyes. Liquid feecler for burners, etc.
*1,155,232. Sept. 28, 1915. Hagar. Carburetor.
1,155,829. Oct. 5, 1915. McAdam. Carburetor.
*1,163,749. Dec. 14, 1915. Gallagher. Carburetor.
"'1,184,873. May 30, 1916. Raymond. Carburetor.
1,187,826. June 20, 1916. France. Carburetor nozzle.
] ,188,754. June 27, 1916. Geer et aJ. Fuel-oil atomizer.
*Re. 13,111 (orig. 386,638). May 3, 1910. Higgins. Carburetor.

Cross-reference patents, class 48, subclass. 155.
132,025
212,502
623.321
643,306

696,231
746,119
750,764
762,707

773,543
77 ,988
793,776
846,680

848,963
871,480
881,431
921,934

9G1,481
976,781
977,813
979,908

995,623
1,001,847
1,037,833
1,074,625

1,106,192
1,116,325
1,141,258
1,157,146

SUBCLASS 155.1, CAllBURETORS, ATOMIZERS, CONSTANT LEVEL.

*634,242. Oct. 3, 1899. Lambert. Mixing device fOl' gasoline engines.
*635,166. Oct. 17, 1899. H ay . Vaporizer for "as engines.
*644,566. Mar. 6, 1900. Aslakson. Internal-combustion engine.
*649,324. May 8, 1900. Longuemare. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*681,382. Aug. 27, 1901. Westman. Feed cup for explosive engines.
*682,596. Sept. 17, 1901. Aldrich. Carbureting device for explosive engines.
*690,989. Jan. 14, 1902. Old. Liquid-fuel feed for explosive engines.
*693,773. Feb. 18, 1902. Bardwell. Carburetor for explosive engines.
697,555. Apr. 15, 1902. Settergren. Mixer or vapor izer for hyd r ocarbon engines.
*699.309. May 6, 1902. Hamilton. Carlm reting device for internal-combustion
motors.
*699,504. May 6, 1902. Duryea. Carburetor for explo ive engines.
*702,469. June 17, 1902. Parkin. Carbm'etol' for explosive engines.
*711,005. Oct. 14, 1902. Schebler. CarbUretor.
"714.597. Nov. 25, 1902. :Mors. Carburetor fOl" explo ive motors.
*719,486. Feb. 3, 1903. Messinger. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*719,536. Feb. 3, 1903. Tuttle. Vaporizer or carburetor for explosi ve engines.
*724,648. Apr. 7, 1903. Zimmerman. Vaporizer for gas engines.
*727.972. May 12, 1903. Kingston. Carburetor for gao 'oline engines.
*729,467. May 26, 1903. White. ExplOSion engine.
*730,649. June 9, 1903. IIedstrom. Carburetor for explosh'e engines.
*734,848. July 28, 1903. Gill. Carburetor for explo ive engines.
*737,463. Aug. 25, 1903. Pearson. Vaporizer for explOSive engines.
*741,962. Oct. 20, 1903. Grouvelle & Arquembourg. Regulator for carburetors for explosive engines.
*745,063. Nov. 24, 1903. Jenne s. Carburetor for gasoline engines.
*746,449. Dec. 8, 1903. Brennan. Carburetor for gas engines.
*756,908. Apr. 12, 1904. Swain. Carburetor for gas engines.
"'759,001. May 3, 1904. Mohler. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*759,396. May 10, 1904. Rutenber. Carbu retor for llydrocarbon engines.
*767,716. Aug. 16, 1904. Ritchie. Carburetor.
*771,096. Sept. 27, 1904. Richard. Carburetor f01" explosion engines.
*771,985. Oct. 11, 1904. Kingston. Carburetor for gasoline engines.

I
:..............&J.~

_ _ _ __ _ __ _ _ _ ~ _

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

100

AERONAU TICS.

*772,979. Oct. 25, 1904. YaUl·S. Carburetol' for hydrocarbon engines.
*775,553. Nov. 22, 1904. Burton & Seibel. Carburetor for bydrocarbon engines.
*776,406. Nov. 29, 1904. Lamb. \'aporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
*780,949. Jan. 24, 1905. Huber. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*789,537. May 9, 1905. Grouvelle & AL'quem~ourg. Atomizing carburetor foL'
explosive engines.
*789,749. May 16, 1905. Maxwell. Carburetor for gas engines.
*791,801. June 6, 1905. Leinau. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*791,810. June 6, 1905. Orr. Carburetor.
*794,502. July 11, 1905. Hennebutte. Carburetor.
*794,927. July 18, 1905. Cushman. Carburetor.
*794,951. July 18, 1905. Shaaf & Lacy. Carburetor.
*795,357. July 25, 1905. Maxwell. Carburetor.
*797,972. Aug. 22, 1905. l\Ioreland. \'aporizer for explosi,e engines.
*802,038. Oct. 17, 1905. Hagar. Carburetol' for hydrocarbon engines.
*804,025. Nov. 7, 1905. Minton. Carburetor for gas engines.
*813,683. F eb. 27, 1906. Adams. Carburetor.
*815,712. Mar. 20, 1906. Johnston. Carburetor for explosive engines.
* 816,846. Apr. 3, 1906. Charron & Girardot. Carburetor for petroleum motors.
* 817,641. Apr. 10, 1906. HarriS. Carburetor.
* 817,903. Apr. 17, 1906. Comstock. Carburetor.
* 821,081. May 22, 1906. Brennan. Carburetor.
* 823,608. June 19, 1906. falezieux. Carburetol' for explOSive engines .
.. 825,499. July 10, 1906. Sturtevant. Carburetor for ga engines.
* 825.754. July 10, 1906. Pearson. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
.. 826,531. July 24, 1906. Briest. Carburetor.
* 82 ,228. Aug. 7, 1906. l\Ienns. Carburetor .
... 829,345. Aug. 21, 1906. Menns. Carburetor.
... 842.052. Jan. 22, 1907. Anderson. Carburetor .
... 846,903. Mar. 12, 1907. Bradbeer. Carburetor .
... 851,2 5. Apr. 23, 1907. Freeman. Carburetor for an explosive engine.
.. 853,428. May 14, 1907. Trebert. Carburetor.
,. 854,246. May 21, 1907. Smith. Carburetor.
'" 855,179. May 28, 1907. Jenness. Carburetor .
.. 859,719. July 9, 1907. Anderson . Carburetor.
'" 862,083. July 30, 1907. Longennecker. Carburetor .
... 863,739. Aug. 20, 1907. Maxwell. Carburetor .
... 864,111. Aug. 20, 1907. Sickles. Carburetor.
* 865,522. Sept. 10, 1907. Park. Carburetor.
* 873,392. Dec. 10, 1907. Stoker. Carburetor .
.. 876,800. Jan. 14, 1908. Gundelach. Carburetor .
... 878,770. F eb. 11, 190. Cahill. Cm'bur tor .
... 881.279. Mar. 10, 1908. Allen. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines .
... 883,740. Apr. 7, 1908. Poppe. Spray carburetor.
'" 886,526. May 5, 1908. Marl'. Carburetor .
.. 886,527. May 5, 1908. MalT. Carburetor .
... 889,487. June 2, 1908. Schneble. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
'" 889,558. June 2, 1908. Thoma. Carburetor.
.
... 890,273. June 9, 1908. Maak & Munz rt. Carburetor .
.. 893,685. July 31, 1908. Willard. Carburetor.
*- 898,361. Sept. 8, 1908. Heitger. Carburetor .
.. 900,098. Oct. 6, 1908. Heitger. Carburetor.
* 907,279. Dec. 22, 1908. Perry. Carburetor
... 907,881. Dec. 29, 1908. Reinekin:r. Carburetor .
.. 908,764. Jan. 5, 1909. Fosnot. Carburetor for explosive engines,
.. 910,326. Jan. 19, 1909. Stevenson. Carburetor.
'" 911,153. Feb. 2, 1909. Otis. Carburetor.
'" 911,349. Feb. 2, 1909. Weiland. Carburetor.
'" 913,354. Feb. 23, 1909. Bree e. Carburetor .
.. 915,647. Mar. 16, 1909. Young. Carburetor.
'" 920,231. May 4, 1909. White. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines .
.. 924,673. June 15, 1909. Knickerboxer. Carburetor.
* 926.039. J une 22, 1909. Warren. Carbur etor .
.. 928,828. J uly 20, 1909. Winton. Carburetor.
* 930,724. Aug. 10, 1909. Boore. Car buretor.

AERONAUTICS.

* 932,360.

101

Aug. 24, 1909. Watt. Carburetor.
Oct. 5, 1909. BaSSford. Carburetor .
.. 936,118. Oct. 5, 1909. Glovet·. Carburetor.
* 936,337. Oct. 12, 1909. Maybach. Carburetor.
* 937,536. Oct. 19, 1909. Knight. Carburetor.
*945,167. Jan. 10, 1910. Holley. Car buretor.
*947,712. Jan. 25, 1910. Hendricks. Carburetor.
*950.278. Feb. 22, 1910. Basey. Carburetor.
"954,4 8. Apr. 12, 1910. Wolf. Carburetor.
*954.630. Apr. 12, 1910. Howarth. Carburetor.
*955,292. Apr. 10, 1910. Sickles. Carburetor.
*957.976. May 17, 1910. Lucas. Atomizer and the like.
*958,128. M.ay 17, 1910. Howarth. Carburetor.
*95 ,897. l\lay 24, 1910. Snedeker. Carburetor.
*960,601. June 7, 1910. Stewart. Carburetor.
*960,697. June 7, 1910. Plein. Carburetor.
*963,187. J uly 5, 1910. Tuerk. Carburetor.
*967,407. Aug. 16, 1910. Mayer. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*973,855. Oct. 25, 1910. Cannon . Carburetor.
*976,322. Nov. 22, 1910. Walters. Carburetor.
*976.344. Nov. 22, 1910. Christofferson et al. Carburetor.
*976,409. Nov. 22, 1910. Stickler. Vaporizer or carburetor.
*976.692. Nov. 22, 1910. Reichenbach. Carburetor.
*976. 13. Nov. 22, 1910. Kreis. Carburetor.
*977,831. Dec. 6, 1910. Page. Carburetor.
*980,668. Jan. 3, 1911. Paull. Carburetor.
*9 3.247. Jan. 31, 1911. Mill er. Carburetor.
"9 3,541. Feb. 7, 1911. Dawson. Carburetor.
*983,836. Feb. 7, 1911. Plein. Carburetor.
*9 5,431. Feb. 28, 1911. 1I1cHahly & Potter. Carburetor.
*9 5,999. Mar. 7, 1911. Harris. Carburetor.
*9 .638. Apr. 4,' 1911. Harris. Carburetor.
*9 ,800. Apr. 4, 1911. McHardy & Potter. Carburetor.
993.065. May 23, 1911. Herschberger. Carburetor.
*993,097. May 23, 1911. Noyes. Anterior-throttle carburetor.
*998,457. Jul y 18. 1911. Bingham. Carburetor.
~1.000.451. Aug. 15, 1911. Steyenson. Ca rburetor.
*1,000,518. Aug. 15, 1911. HatTi. Carburetol·.
1,002.458. Sept. 5, 1911. SekolVs1."Y. Carburetor.
*1,002,646. Sept. 5, 1911. Conrad. Carburetor.
*1,005.491. Oct. 10, 1911. Wiland. Carburetor.
*1.006,088. Oct. 17, 1911. Hippisley. Carburetor.
*1,007,729. :Kov. 7, 1911. Poppe. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,011.565. Dec. 12, 1911. BrOCk. Carburetor.
*1,012.781. Dec. 26, 1911. Winters. Carburetor.
*1.013,708. Jan. 2, 1912. Weiland. Carburetor.
*1,014,188. Jan. 9, 1912. Voorhees. Carburetor.
*1,016,251. Feb. 6, 1912. Dayton. Carburetor.
1,017,186. Feb. 13, 1912. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1.019,209. Mar. 5, 1912. Welsh. Carburetor.
.
*1,020,198. Mar. 12, 1912. Hamill. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,020,931. Mar. 19, 1912. Smith. Carburetor.
*1,023,470. Apr. 16, 1912. Hill & Underw·oocl. Carbur etor.
*1.026.491. l\Iay 14, 1912. Browning. Carbmetor.
*1,027,459. May 28, 1912. Barnard. Carburetor.
*1,028.723. June 4, 1912. H ez inger. Carburetor.
*1,029,796. June 18. 1912. Daw on. Apparatu . for producing an explosive or
combustible mixture of liquid fuel a nd air.
*1,031,147. July 2, 1912. Plumm. Spray carburetor.
*1,033. 6. July 30, 1912. Gentle. Carburetor.
*1,030,301. Aug. 20, 1912. Miller. Carburetor.
*1,037,833. Sept. 3, 1912. Noyes. Automatic r egulation for carburetors.
*1,037,834. Sept. 3, 1912. Raymond. Carburetor.
*1,03 , 04. Sept. 12, 1912. Warren . Carbu retor.
*1,038,921. Sept. 17, 1912. Martin. Carburetor.
*1,042,077. Oct. 22, 1912. Brown. Carburetor.
~ 935, 33.

102

ABRON AUTICS.

*1,042,606. Oct. 29, 1912. Roth. Carburetor.
*1,042,528. Oct. 29, 1912. Brown. Car buretor.
*1,043,077. Nov. 5, 1912. Dock. Carburetor.
*1,044,754. Nov. 19, 1912. Coulter. Carburetor.
*1,045,251. Nov. 26, 1912. Bourne. Carburetor.
*1,045,613. Nov. 26, 1912. Roth. Carburetor.
*1,049,038. Dec. 31, 1912. Barstow & Bradford. Carburetor for internalcombustion engines.
*1,052,051. Feb. 4, 1913. Grimes. Carburetor.
*1,052,397. Feb. 4, 1913. Wingfield. Carburetor for petrol motors.
*1,053,136. Feb. 11, 1913. Daellenbach. Carburetor.
"'1,055,042. Mar. 4, 1913. Higgins. Carburetor.
*1,057,506. Apr. I, 1913. Stevens. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
"'1,061,995. May 20, 1913. Erickson. Carburetor.
•
*1,064,627. June 10, 1913. Ensign. Vaporizer.
*1,064,628. June 10, 1913. Ensign. Carburetor.
1,064.866. June 17, 1913. Stewart. Throttle for carburetors.
*1,065,067. June 17, 1913. Naczek. Carburetor.
*1,065,462. June 24, 1913. Miller. Carburetor.
*1,065,503. June 24, 1913. Byrom. CarburetOl'.
*1,066,608. July 8, 1913. Harris. Carburetor.
*1,067,449. July 15, 1913. Steward. Carburetor.
*1,072,376. Sept. 2, 1913. Alden. Carburetor.
*1,072,492. Sept. 9, 1913. Pierson. Carburetor.
"1,072,565. Sept. 9, 1913. Brautigam. Carburetor.
*1,074,625. Oct. 7, 1913. John on et a l. Carburetor.
*1,081,203. Dec. 9, 1913. Bull. Carburetor .
1,081,258. Dec. 9, 1913. Ulrich & Rahr. Carburetor.
*1,082,466. Dec. 23, 1913. Lucas. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,085,003. Jan. 20, 1914. Au tin. Carburetol·.
*1,086,226. Feb. 3, 1914. Sas ano. Carburetor.
*1,086,594. Feb. 10, 1914. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1,088,181. Feb. 24, 1914. Raymond. Carburetor.
*1,088,664. Feb. 24, 1914. Lamb. Vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
*1,088,974. Mar. 3, 1914. Drysdale. Carburetor.
*1,090,209. Mar. 17, 1914. Heitger. Carburetor.
*1,091,426. Mar. 24, 1914. Davis. Carburetor.
*1,092,953. Apr. 14, 1914. Sanborn. Carburetor.
*1,095,101. Apr. 28, 1914. Gardner. Carburetor.
*1,095,510. May 5, 1914. Miller. Carburetor.
*1,096,482. May 12, 1914. Winton. Carburetor.
*1,096,626. May 12, 1914. Heftler. Carburetor.
*1,097,165. May 19, 1914. Bucherer. Spray carburetor.
*1,097,401. May 19, 1914. Donndorf. Jet carburetor.
"1,101,736. June 30, 1914. Gillet. Carburetor.
*1,103,178. July 14, 1914. Eiker. Carburetor.
*1,103,802. July 14, 1914.. Meis nero Carburetor.
"1,103,864. .July 14, 1914. Howarth. Carburetor.
*1,105,200. July 28, 1914. Brown. Carburetor.
*1,106,258. Aug. 4, 1914. Tucker & Wilding. Carburetor.
"'1,107,698. Aug. 18, 1914. Norton. Carburetor.
*1,107,713. Aug. 18, 1914. Shakespeare & Schmidt. Carburetor.
*1,108,727. Aug. 25, )914. Ensign. Vaporizer.
*1,111,763. Sept. 29, 1914. Rogers. Carburetor.
~· 1,113,221.
Oct. 13, 1914. Krause. Carburetor.
*1,113,533. Oct. 13, 1914. Barrett. Carburetor.
>!-1,116,023. Nov. 3, 1914. Crawford. Cal·buretor.
*1,116,581. Nov. 10, 1914. Foulds. Carburetor.
*1,116,986. Nov. 10, 1914. Bull. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,118,459. Nov. 24, 1914. Winkler. Self-leveling carburetor .
*1,118.917. Dec. 1, ]914. Bucker. Carburetor.
*1,118,919. Dec. 1, 1914. Cauda. Carburetor.
*1,119,181. Dec. I, 1914. Leduc. Carburetor.
~1,1l9 . 821. Dec. 8, 1914. Gillilaud & Silarpneck. Carburetor.
*1,120,763. Dec. 15, 1914. Thomas. Carburetor.
*) ,120,845. Dec. 15, 1914. Parkin. Carburetor.
*1,121,630. Dec. 22, 1914. Holley. Carburetor.

AERONAUTICS.

103

*1,123,027. Dec. 29, 1914. Simon on. Carburetor.
*1,123,955. Jan. 5, 1915. Tic-e. Carburetor.
*1,124,949. Jan. 12, 1915. Raymond. Carburetor.
*1,125,338. Jan. 19, 1915. Keizer. Carburetor.
*1,125,339. Jan. 19, 1915. K eizer. Carburetor.
*1,125,340. Jan. 19, 1915. Keizer. Carburetor.
*1,126,127. Jan. 26, 1915. Swan. Carburetor.
1,127,286. Feb. 2, 1915. Ru ·sell. Carburetor.
*1,129,103. Feb. 23, 1915. Keller. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*1,129,129. Feb. 23, 1915. Sbake peare & Schmidt. Carburetor.
*1,130,981. Mar. 9, 1915. Kingston. Carburetor.
*1,131,312. Mar. 9, 1915. Beamer & Duffy. Carburetor.
*1,132,314. Mar. 16, 1915. Eiker. Carburetor.
*1,133,754. Mar. 30, 1915. Shortt. CarbUl'etor.
*1,134,021. Mar. 30, 1915. Sohon . Carburetor.
*1,134,365. Apr. 6, 1915. Barnes. Carburetor.
*1,135,046. Apr. 13, Ull5. Ottaway. Carburetor.
*1,135,315. Apr. 13, 1915. Odell. Carburetor.
*1,135,544. Apr. 13, 1915. Norton. Carburetor.
*1,135,729. Apr. 13, 1915. Schoof. Carburetol·.
*1,137,238. Apl·. 27, 1915. Sherman. Cal·buretor.
*1,137,307. Apr. 27, 1915. Edens. Carburetor.
*1,139,851. May 18, 1915. Dayton. Carburetor.
*1,140,071. May 18, 1915. Rotlle. Carburetor.
*1,140,232. May 18, 1915. Allen. Carburetor.
*1,140,721. May 25, 1915. Stamps. Carburetor.
*1,140,722. May 25, 1915. Stamps. CarOuretOl·.
*1,142,763. June 8, 1915. Perry. Carburetor.
*1,143.227. June 15. 1915. Prescott. Carburetor.
*1,143.511. June 15, 1915. Cox. Carburetor.
*1,148,333. July 27, 1915. Payne. Carburetor.
*1,148,898. Aug. 3, 1915. Henley. Carburetor.
*1,149,035. Aug. 3, 1915. Doui:!. Carburetor.
*1,149,743. Aug. 10, 1915. England. Thermostatic control for the valve of a
carburetor.
*1,150,782. Aug. 17, 1915. Lucas. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*1,151,159. Aug. 24, 1915. Brown. Carburetor.
*1,151.286. Aug. 24, 1915. Ro\vel1. Carburetor.
*1,153.891. Sept. 21, 1915. Breath. Carburetor.
*1,151.578. Aug. 31, 1915. Entz. Carburetor.
*1,153.999. Sept. 21, 1915. Carpenter. Carbur etor.
*1,157.363. Oct. 19, 1915. Blomquist. Carburetor.
*1,157,507. Oct. 19, 1915. Cerny. Carburetor.
*1,157,541. Oct. 19, 1915. Huskisson. Carburetor.
*1,1.60,662. Nov. 16, 1915. Slaby. Carburetor.
*1,161.437. Nov. 23, 1915. Beamer & Duffy. Carburetor.
*1,162,111. Nov. 30, 1915. Simpson. Carburetor.
*1,162,576. Jov. 30, 1915. Daimler & Slaby. Throttle valve for carburetors.
*1,163.581. Dec. 7. 1915. Alley. Carburetor.
*1,163,749. Dec. 14, 1915. Gl. Gallagher. Carburetor.
*1,165,087. Dec. 21, 1915. Fulton. Carburetor.
*1,165,224. Dec. 21, 1915. Cadott. Carburetor.
*1,169.483. Jan. 25. 1916. Henley. Carburetor.
*1,171,235. Feb. 8, 1916. Olsen. Carburetor.
*1,173,378. Feb. 29, 1916. Payton. Carburetol·.
*1,173,762. Feb. 29, 1916. Arquembourg. Carburetor.
*1,174.529. Mar. 7. 1916. Sykes. Carburetor.
*1,177,395. Mar. 28, 1916. Dickie. Carburetor.
*1,178,127. Apr. 4, 1916. Bricken. Carburetor.
*1,178,296. Apr. 4, 1916. Cahill. Carburetor.
*1,179.663. Apr. 18, 1916. Shake peare & Schmid. Carburetor.
*1,180,939. Apr. 25, 1916. 0 tenberg. Carburetor.
*1,181,514. May 2, 1916. Eynon. Carburetor.
*1,183,125. May 16, 1916. Shal,e peare & Schmid. Carburetor.
*1.184,541. May 23, 19) 6. Kustel. Carburetor.
*1,184,873. May 30, 1916. Raymond. Carburetor.
*1,184,888. May 30, 1916. Stevens. Carburetor.

104
*1,184.889.
*1,185,574.
1,1 6.976.
1,1 6,5 8.
1,187,945.
*1,190,715.
*1,192,213.

AERONAUTICS.

May 30, 1916.
May 30, 1916.
June 13, 1916.
June 13, 1916.
June 20, 1916.
July 11, 1916.
July 25, 1916.

Stevens. Carburetor.
Allen. Carburetor.
Dugrey. Carburetor.
Lemon. Carburetor.
Briggle. Carburetor.
Bottome. Carburetor.
Lamb. Carburetor.

Cl'osS-l'etel'ence lJatents, class 48, subclass 155.1.

62,856
726,9 6
733,625
973, TT
978,076
979,700
984,032
9 4,109
985,670
986,572
995,976
1,001,950
1,001,969

741,810
747.235
760,673
1,005,300
1,006,411
1,007,659
1,008,155
1,011,960
1,01 ,164
1,01 ,776
1,029. 97
1,033,443
1,038,26:...

807.479
862.574
891,322
1,038.699
1,040,414
1,040,619
1,041,099
1,043,342
1,046,141
1,048,518
1,062,688
1.065,948
1,073,179

907.123
909.490
915,684
1,073,473
1,078.5 2
1,084,0:..
1,0 9,0 9
1,097.039
1,099,0 6
1,105.003
1.106,226
1,106,935
1,110,453

954,905
959,066

964.657
966,381

968.215
971, 62

1,120.128
1,124,697
1,131.371
1,134.366
1,141,570
1,144,206
1,145,476
1,14 ,,1.85
1,149,908
1,150,115

1,151.989
1,152,173
1,153,436
1,153,4 7
1,155,457
1,157,116
1,159,423
1,163,223
1,165.914
1,166,595

1,166,734
1,167,457
1,169,340
1,169,592
1,170,416
1,171,074
1,176,267

SUBCLASS 155.2, CAllBURETORS, ATOMIZERS, CONSTANT LEVEL, AUTOMATIC DIL"cTION.

*656.197. Aug. 21, 1900. Lumi~re. Carburetor for petroleum or other engines.
*654.841. Jan. 1, 1901. Duryea. lUixer for explosiye engines.
*667,910. Feb. 12, 1901. Hatcher & Packard. ~Iixer and vaporizer for explosive encines.
*713,146. Nov. 11, ]902. Power. Vaporizing carburetor.
*744,257. ~ov . 17, 1903.
turtevant. Carburetor for explosion engines.
*774,079. Nov. 1, 1904. Jager. Vaporizing carburetor for internal-combustion
engines.
*783,902. Feb. 28, 1905. Shipman. Carburetor for explosi,e engines.
*785,558. !lIar. 21, 1905. Kr ebs. Oil engine.
';'785.622. Mar. 21, 1905. Longuemare. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*790,173. May 16, 1905. Biehn. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*791,447. June 6, 1905. Breath. A.tomizer for internal-combu ·tion engines.
*792,628. June 20, 1905.
turtevant. Carburetor for gas engines.
*796,723. Aug. 8, 1905. Hewitt. Carburetor.
*799,791. Sept. 19, 1905. Hitchcock. Yaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
*800.647. Oct. 3, 1905. Hatchel'. Carburetor.
* 02.216. Oct. 17, 1905. Jolm'ton. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*806.830. Dec. 12, 1905. Packard. Mixer and yaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
*810,792. Jan. 23, 1906. McIntosh. Carburetor.
*813,653. Feb. 27, 1906. Law. Carburetor.
*820,5 3. May 15, 1906. Longuemare. Carburetor for h~' lrocarbon engines.
*822,681. June 5. 1906. Middleton. Carburetor for gasoline engines.
*831,547. Sept. 25, 1906. Dunlop. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*831, 32. Sept. 25, 1906. Coffin. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*835,564. Nov. 13, 1906. Shain. Vaporizer or carburetor .
.. 35,880. Nov. 13, 1906. Cltlment. Carburetor.
*838,085. Dec. 11, 1906. Coole Carburetor for explosive engines.
*840.204. Jan. 1, 1907. Franqui t. Carburetor.
*844.894. Feb. 19, 1907. Renault. Carburetor.
*848,170. 1\1ar. 26, 1907. Hedstrom. Carburetor.
* 50.339. Apr. 16, 1907. Bo"·ers. Carburetor for gasoline engines.
*855,170. l\Iay 28, 1907. Gray. Carburetor.
*855,574. June 4, 1907. Henabr ay. Carburetor .
.. 56,95. June 11, 1907. Huber. Carburetor for hydr ocarbon engines.
*857.275. June 18, 1907. Gaither. Carburetor.
860,522. July 16, 19 7. Brown. Carburetor.
*860,848. July 28, 1907. Bowers. Carburetor.
*860,908. July 23, 1907. Enrico. Carburetor for oil engines.
*861,438. J uly 30, 1907. Cu hman. Carburetor.
*864,687. Aug. 27, 1907. Radcliffe. Vaporizer.

AERONAUTICS.

105

*865,539. Sept. 10, 1907. StewUl't. Oarburetor.
* 68,251. Oct. 15, 1907. Boll()e. Carburetor.
*868,265. Oct. 15, 1907. Hartford. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*869,675. Oct. 29, 1907. Winton. Gasoline carburetor.
*870,052. Nov. 5, 1907. Scbebler. Car buretor.
*875,716. Jan. 7, 1908. Longuemar e. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*876,287. Jan. 7, 1908. \Villiams. Carburetor.
877,136. Jan. 21, 1908. Stewart. Carburetor.
*878',411. Feb. 4, 1908. Winton. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
*882.023. Mar. 17, 1908. Shain. Vaporizer or carburetor for gas engines.
*886.265. Apr. 28, 1908. Speed. Rapid-fire carburetor.
*8 6,760, lIIay 5, 1908. Brush. Carbureting mechanism for internal-combustion engines,
*888,487. lIIay 26, 1908. Greuter , Carburetor.
*888.965. May 26, 1908. Delaunay-Belleville. Automatic carburetor for explosive motors.
*890,494. June 9, 1908. Byron. Carburetor.
*896,559. Aug. 18, 1008. Longuemare. Air inlet fo r carburetor.
*899,109. Sept. 22, 1908. Heitger. Carburetor.
*900,731. Oct. 13, 1908. H eitgel·. Carburetor.
*910.379. Jan. 19, 1909. Hedstrom. Carburetor.
*911,105. Feb. 3, 1909. Abel. Carburetor.
*911,692. Feb. 9, 1909. Amlrew. Carburetor.
*912,083. Feb. 9. 1909. Daley. Carburetor for inter nal-combustion engines.
*916,103. lIIar. 23, 1909. Cartwright. Carburetor for explosive engines.
916.214. Mar. 23, 1909. Stewart. Controller for carburetors.
*920,642. May 4, 1909. Pf~i.nder. Automatically governed carburetor.
*921,410. May 11, 1909. K aley. Carburetor.
"924,200. June 8, 1909. Stewart. Carburetor.
"925,973. June 22, 1909. Winton & Anderson. Carburetor.
*926,533. June 29, 1909. W inton & Anderson. Carburetor.
*926,598. June 29, 1909. Perry. Carburetor.
*927,529. July 14, 1909. Harrington. Carburetor.
*928,042. July 13, 1909. Golclberg. Carburetor.
*929.260. July 27, 1909. Ste,ens. Carburetor.
*929.327. July 27, 1909. Rinke. Carburetor.
*932,860. Aug. 31, 1909. Grouyelle & Arquembour g. Carburetor for internalcombustion engines.
*938,894. Nov. 2, 1909. Rapp. Carburetor.
*942,977. Dec. 14, 1909. Simonson. Carburetor.
*943,197. Dec. 14. 1909. Miller. Carburetor.
*943,242. Dec. 14, 1909. Fergusson & Sheppy. Carburetor.
*944,048. Dec. 21, 1909. Price. Carburetor.
*956,882. May 3, 1910. Bright. Carburetor.
*960.080. lIIay 31, 1910. Fay & Ells\"orth. Carburetor.
960,084. May 31, 1910. Friedenwald & - --. Auxiliary air valve for chargeforming devices.
*961.590. June 14, 1910. England. Val,e for carburetors and other apparatus.
*968,597. Aug. 30, 1910. Parkin. Carburetor.
*970,916. Sept. 20, 1910. Gerl(en. Carburetor for gas engines.
*971,689. Oct. 4, 1910. Schebler. Carburetor.
*973,056. Oct. 18, 1910. l\lader. Carburetor valve.
*973,755. Oct. 25, 1910. Carter. Carburet or.
*973,877. Oct. 25, 1910. Pierce. Carburetor.
*976,558. Nov. 22, 1910. Dayton. Air-controlling mechanism for carburetors.
*977,377. Nov. 29, 1910. Donnelly et al. Triple auxiliary air valve for carburetors.
*9 1,156. Jan. 10, 1911. Barker. Carburet or.
*984,276. Feb. 14, 1911. K elly. Carbm·etor.
*983,670. Feb. 28, 1911. Grouvelle et a!. Carbur et or .
*989,697. Apr. 18, 1911. Cutler. Carburetor.
*992,260. May 16, 1911. Rush. Vapor izer and separator.
*995.919. June 20, 1911. Smith. Carbur etor.
*995,976. June 20, 1911. Maud. Carburetor.
*996,897. J uly 4, 1911. Swarts. Carburetor.
*996,981. J uly 4, 1911. Folber th. Carburetor.
*997,169. July 4, 1911. W inton & Ander son. Carburet or.

106

AERONAUTICS.

*997,233. July 4, 1911. Bowers. Carburetor.
*1,000,054. Aug. 8, 1911. Ulrich. Carburetor.
*1,001,969. Aug. 29, 1911. Maynard. Carburetor.
*1,003,994. Sept. 29, 1911. Dennis. Carburetor.
1,004,031. Sept. 29, 1911. lver. Force·feed carburetor.
*1,055,300. Oct. 10, 1911. Pierce. Carburetor.
*1,006,033. Oct. 17, 1911. Tel' Weer. Carburetor.
*1,006,663. Oct. 24, 1911. Kugler. Carburetor.
*1,010,714. Dec. 5, 1911. Zisch. Carburetor.
*1,013,082. Dec. 26, 1911. Symmonds. Carburetor.
*1,018,126. Feb. 20, 1912.
ageborn. Carburetor.
*1,018,164. Feb. 20, 1912. Chapin. Carburetor.
*1,018,766. Feb. 27, 1912. Kerr. Carburetor.
*1,018,776. Feb. 27, 1913. Plein. Carburetor.
*1,019,128. Mar. 5, 1912. Bulock. Carburetor.
*1,019,160. Mar. 5, 1912. lvor. Carburetor.
*1,020,059. Mar. 12, 1912. Schulz. Carburetor.
*1,022,326. Apr. 2, 1912. Namur. Carburetor.
*1,035,937. Aug. 20, 1912. Anderson. Carburetor.
*1,038,050. Sept. 10, 1912. Wills. Carburetor.
*1,038,262. Sept. 10, 1912. Anstice. Carburetor.
*1,038,699. Sept. 17, 1912. Wilkinson. Carburetor.
*1,041,099. Oct. 15, 1912. Kerns. Carburetor.
*1,041,480. Oct. 15, 1912. Kaley, Carburetor.
*1,042,004. Oct. 22, 1912. lvor, Carburetor.
*1,042,982. Oct. 29, 1912. Sliger. Carburetor.
*1,043,692.
OV. 5, 1912. Grath. Carburetor.
*1,044,245.
ov. 12, 1912. Reedy. Carburetor.
*1,044,569. Nov. 18, 1912. Perrin. Carburetor.
*1,044,576. Nov. 19, 1912. Russel!. Carburetor.
*1,044,594. Nov. 19, 1912. Stroud. Carburetor.
*1,046,344. Dec. 3, 1912. Stewart. Carburetor.
*1,052,897. Feb. 11, 1913. Dayton. Carburetor.
*1,052,917. Feb. 11, 1913. Heitger. Carburetot·.
*1,053,145. Feb. 18, 1913. Ball. Carburetor.
*1,055,352. Mar. 11, 1913. Pembroke. Carburetor.
*1,059,368. Apr. 22, 1913. Johnson. Carburetor.
*1,062,273. May 20, 1913. Conklin. Carburetors.
*1,062,688. May 27, 1913. Bastian. Carburetors.
*1,064,446. June 10, 1913. Comstock. Carburetor.
*1,067,502. July 15, 1913. Browne. Carburetor.
*1,069,671. Aug. 12, 1913. Brush. Carblu·etor.
*1,071,858. Sept. 2, 1913. Ball. Carburetor.
*1,073,473. Sept. 16, 1913. Claude!. Carburetor.
*1,073,695. Sept. 23, 1913. Marr. Carburetor.
*1,076,827. Oct. 28, 1913. Haynes. Carburetor.
*1,078,169. 'ov. 11, 1913. Schreiber. Carburetor,
*1,080,166. Dec. 2, 1913. Pribi!. Carburetor.
*1,080,645. Dec. 9, 1913. Mayer. Carburetor.
*1,086,287. Feb. 3, 1914. Gehrmann. Carburetor.
*1,089,423. Mar. 10, 1914. Mayer. Carburetor.
*1,090,556. Mar. 17, 1914. Mllgevit & Picker. Carburetor for internal·combus·
tion engines.
*1,092,282. Apr. 7, 1914. Mixsell. Carburetor.
*1,093,627. Apr. 21, 1914. Johnson. Carhuretor.
*1,093,901. Apr. 21, 1914. Wyman. Carburetor.
*1,095,212. May 5, 1914. Johnson. Carburetol'.
*1,095,326. May 5, 1914. Huff. Carburetor.
*1,096,569. May 12, 1914. Shat'Pueck. Carburetor.
*1,099,714. June 9, 1914. Munden. Cat·buretor.
*1,104,975. July 28, 1914. Felske. Carburetor.
*1,105,134. July 28, 1914. Hnnemann. Carburetor.
*1,106,145. Aug. 4, 1914. Hazelton. Carburetor.
*1,106,226. Aug. 4, 1914. Lamb. Carburetor.
*1,106,802. Aug. 11, 1914. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1,107,693. Aug. 18, 1914. Molina. Carburetor.
*1,107,849. Aug. 18, 1914. Schoen. Carburetor.

107

AERONAUTICS.

'*1,109,356. Sept. 1,1914. My cue. Carburetor.
*1,110,041. Sept. 8, 1914. Christian. Carburetor.
1,110,482. Sept. 15, 1914. Collier. Carburetor.
*1,113,533. Oct. 13,1914. Barrett. Carburetor.
*1,115,543. Nov. 8, 1914. Huguelet. Carburetor.
*1,116,673. Nov. 10, 1914. De Clair mont. Air·valve control for car buretors.
*1,119,078. Dec. 1, 1914. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1,119,757. Dec. 1,1914. Kings. Carburetor.
*1,120,303. Dec. 8, 1914. Georgen on. Carburetor.
*1,122,572. Dec. 29, 1914. Blackert. Carburetor.
*1,124,918. Jan. 12, 1915. Krause. Carburetor.
*1,126,218. Jan. 26, 1915. Howe. Carburetor.
*1,127,992. Feb. 9, 1915. Hartshorn. Carbureto ..
*1,129,864. Mar. 2, 1915. Haas. Carburetor.
*1,131,584. Mar. 9, 1915. Wildy. Spray carburetor.
*1,134,531. Apr. 6, 1915. Heitger. Carburetor.
*1,134,532. Apr. 6, 1915. Heit"er. Carburetor.
*1,141,086. May 25, 1915. Kent. Carbuz·etor.
*1,145,138. July 6, 1915. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1,148,461. July 27, 1915. Russell. Carburetor.
*1,156,149. Oct. 12, 1915. Kingston. Carburetor.
*1,159,423. Nov. 9, 1915. Schulte. Carburetor.
*1,166,595. Jan. 4, 1916. Johnson. Carburetor.
*1,167,320. Jan. 4, 1916. Thomas. Carburetor.
*1,171,401. Feb. 8, 1916. Purcell. Carburetor.
*1,172,388. Feb. 22, 1916. Prescott. Carburetor.
*1.172,432. Feb. 22, 1916. Clark. Carburetor.
"'1,176,729. Mar. 21, 1916. Flechter. Carburetor.
*1,177,318. Mar. 28, 1916. Goldberg. Carburetor.
*1,179,386. Apr. 18, 1916. Anderson . Carburetor.
*1,180,379. Apr. 25, 1916. Dayton. Carburetor.
*1,180,389. Apr. 25, 1916. Friend . Carburetor.
*1,1 3,137. May 16, 1916. Swarts. Carburetor.
1,186,166. June 6, 1$1l6. Bennett. Carburetor.
1,1 6,5 4. June 13, 1916. Kingston. Carburetor.
(Withdrawn.)
*1,185,273. May 30, 1916. Atherton. Carburetor.
*Re. 13,784 (orig. 1,067,502) . Aug. 4, 1914. Browne. Carburetor.
*Re. 13,837 (or ig. 1,042,982). Dec. 1, 1914. • Sliger. Carburetor.

Cross·reference p,atents, class 48, subclass 155.2.
951,002
955,956
973,855
976,344
976,881
979,555
1,066,508
1,067,623
1,069,389
1,073,727
1,076,309
1,077,256
1,078,413
1,078,590

981,853
982,297
983,836
985,122
993,065
1,001,847
1,078,591
1,078,592
1,079,338
1,080,696
1,081,258
1,084,028
1,084,693
1,084,954

1,006,130
1,009,121
1,010,185
1,010.003
1,011,641
1,011,960
1,0 5,194
1,085,239
1,0 6.226
1,08T.187
1,087,218
1,095,402
1,097,7 7
1,103,864

1,017,750
1,020,270
1,022,702
1,022,703
1,023,470
1,027,768
1,112.641
1,114,222
1,122,703
1,120,573
1,120,763
1,12:-,525
1,126,249
1,128,773

1,030,343
1,033,443
1,036,301
1,036,536
1,037,834
1,040,528
1,130,502
1,132,934
1,134,942
1,135.270
1,135,689
1,136,368
1,137,135
1,137,727

1,042,017 • 1,059,501
1,044,314 1,061,995
1,046,111 1,064,867
1,046,141 1,065,331
1,049,887
1,051,440
1,138,204 1,149,323
1,139,914 1,152,134
1,140,525 1,155,829
1,141,796 1,156,823
1,143,092 1,157.541
1,145,172 1,158,435
1,147,672
1,149,291

SUBCLASS 156, CARBUBETORS, CAPILLARY.

59,474. Nov. 6, 1866. Stevens. I mproved apparatus for carbureting air.
60,670. Jail. 1, 1867. Bassett. Improved capillary material for filling gas and
air carburetors.
64,361. Apr. 30, 1867. Porter. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas and
air.
66,066. June 25, 1 67. Bas ett. Improvement in gn carburetors.
81,974. Sept. 8, 1 68. Bassett. Appar atus for the manufacturing of heating
and illum inating gas.

108

AERONAUTICS.

83,748. Nov. 3, 1868. Williams. Improvement in charging gases with vapors
of byclrocarbon liquid .
94,898. Sept. 14, 1869. La Fronge. Impro,ed apparatus for carbureting air.
96,842. Nov. 16, 1 69. Shaler. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
108,432. Oct. 18, 1870. Bartholf. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air and ga es.
100,148, Nov. 8, 1870. Spang. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
113,968, Apr. 25, 1871. Beers. Impro,ement in apparatus for carbureting air .
116,563. July 4, 1871. Coons. Improvement in carburetors for gas and air.
142.545. Sept. 2, 1871. Lockwood. Improvement in charburetors.
1-18,579. Mar. 17, 1874.
loper. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air and gas.
156,513. Nov. 3, 1874. Venner & Judy. Improvement in gas carburetors.
1.) ,802. Jan. 19, 1875. Martin. Improvement in ga carbureting machines.
166.602. Aug. 10, 1 75. Gearing. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
]6 .797. Oct. 11, 1875. Snow. Improvement in car buretors.
169.034. Oct. 19, 1875. Pollard. Impro,ement in carburetors.
169,872. Nov. 9, 1875. Werni. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
] 80.061. July 18, 1 76. Pollard. Improvement in carburetor .
1, 1,727. Aug. 29, 1 76. Schmidt. Improvement in carburetors.
185,957. Jan. 2, 1877. Peacock & Bradley. Improvement in carburetors.
198.731. Dec. 25, 1 77. l\Ierritt. Impro,ement in carburetors.
203,505. May 7, 1878. Sloper. Improvement in carburetors.
203.702. May 14, 1878. Buell. Improvement in apparatu for carbureting air
and gas.
207,9 3. Sept. 10, 1 78. Reid. I mprovement in carbureting apparatus.
209.076. Oct. 15, 1878. Reznor. Improvement in air carburetors.
209,351. Oct. 29, 1878. Merritt. I mpro,ement in purifier and regulator for
carburetors.
:!10.019. Nov. 19, 1878. Dougherty. Improyement in carburetors.
211.744. Jan. 28, 1879. Keller. Improvement in carburetors.
213.931. Apr. 1, 1879. Pew. Improvement in carbureting apparatus for air
and gas.
219,705. Sept. 16, 1879. Fleming. Improvement in carburetors.
220,001. Sept. 23, 1 79. Train. Improvement in gns carburetors.
221.948. Nov. 25, 1879. Wayland. Carburetor.
234,955. Nov. 30, 1880. Burrows. Carbureting apparatu .
236,159. Jan. 4, 1881. HO\Te & i\liner. Apparatu for carbureting air.
241,419. May 10, 1881. Reynolds. Apparatus for obtaining an illuminating
and heating gas.
246.601. Sept. 6. 1 81. Copeland. Carbureting apparatus.
247.390. Sept. 30, 1 1. Morey . Carburetor.
251,416. Dec. 27, 18 1. Crowell. Carbureting apparatus.
253,202. Feb. 7, 1882. Habel·stick. Carburetor.
256,741. Apr. 18, 1 82. Reynolds. Gas-generating apparatus.
261,852. Aug. 1, 1882. Ives. Means for producing the oxyhydrogen blowpipe
flame.
292.622. Jan. 29, 1884. Billings. Apparatuf:; for proclucing gas.
30-1.507. Sept. 2, 18 4. Dillenbeck. Gas machine.
397.631. Feb. 12, 1 9. Carsley. Vaporizer.
398,225. Feb. 19, 1 9. Bury & Biclelman. Carburetor.
420,591. Feb. 4, 1890. Da\T on. Carburetor.
450,091. Apr. 7, 1 91. Woolley. Vaporizer for gas engines.
476,709. June 7, 1892. Weaver. Carburetor and purifier.
486,442. Nov. 22, 1892. Enos. Carburetor.
493,992. Mar. 21, 1893. Fontaine. Apparatu for carbureting air.
566,415. Aug. 2f5, 1 96.
chroeder. Carburetor.
.
590.640. Sept. 28, 1 97. Byrne. Carburetor.
620,5 6. Mar. 7, 1899. Henclerson.
arburetor.
650.276. May 22, 1900. Robin on. Carburetor.
660,125. Oct. 23, 1900. Schimclt. Carburetor.
663.699. Dec. 11, 1900. Latham. Carburetor.
669,317. Mar. 5, 1901. BroYI'n. Carburetor.
709,866. Sept. 30, 1902. Bouchaud-Praceiq. Carburetor.
716,716. Dec. 23, 1902. Jenney. Gas generator.
720,485. Feb. 10, 1903. Robinson. Carburetor.
721,268. Feb. 24, 1903. Wolff. Carburetor.

~

I

109

AERONAUTICS.

763,074. June 21, 1904. Ruthven. Carburetor.
765,108. July 12, 1904. Soeder. Carburetor.
772,551. Oct. 18, 1904. Akeson. Carburetor.
774,486. Nov. 8, 1904. Marshall. Carburetor.
775,859. Nov. 22, 1904. Russell. Means for carbureting air.
782,619. Feb. 14, 1905. Mossig. Portable carburetor.
794,938. July 18, 1905. Houlon. Carburetor.
818,397. Apr. 17, 1906. Tre enreuter. Carburetor.
825,336. July 10, 1906. McCormick. Carburetor.
839,540. Dec. 25, 1906. Berg. Blowpipe apparatus.
843,028. Feb. 5, 1D07. Mueller. Carburetor.
847,362. Mal'. 19, 1907. Paris. Apparatus for manufacture of gas.
853,196. May 7, 1907. Akeson & Anderson. Carburetor.
856.654. June 11, 1907. McCormick & l\Dller. Carburetor.
860,334. July 16, 1907. Schell. CarbUretor.
885,265. A.pr. 21, 1908. Loewenstein. Carbnretor.
888,190. May 19, 1908. Odell. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
910,207. Jan. 19, 1909. Keep. Carburetor.
913,456. Feb. 23, 1909. Bertrand & Goubillon. Carburetor.
934,367. Sept. 14, 1909. Steel. Carburetor.
942,503. Dec. 7, 1909. Jacobs. CarbUretor for hydrocarbon engines.
97D,761. Dec. 27, 1910. Haywood. Carburetor.
985,122. Feb. 28, 1911. Ashmusen. Carburetor.
985,515. Feb. 28, 1911. Dorman. Carburetor.
1,025,553. May 7, 1912. Williams. Carburetor.
1,033,443. July 23, 1912. Morris & Merritt. Carburetor.
1,062,180. May 20, 1913. Meyers. Carburetor.
1,073,727. Sept. 23, 1913. Atwood. Carburetor.
1,076,309. Oct. 21, 1913. Patterson & PerciYal. Carburetor.
1,082,865. Dec. 30, 1913. Goodyear. Carburetor.
1,089,501. Mal'. 10, 1914. Ruthven. Carburetor.
1,096,750. May 12, 1914. Pond. Carburetor.
1,097,039. l\Iay 19, 1914. Miller. Carburetor.
1,105,371. July 28, 1914. Orner. Carburetor.
1,146,625. July 13, 1915. Sanders: Carburetor.
1,152,915. Sept. 7, 1915. Hu ·zi"ir. Carburetor.
1,167,290. Jan. 4, 1915. Glover. Carburetor.
*1,190,124. July 4, 1916. Lukacsevics & T errill. Carburetor.
*1,190,125. July 4, 1916. Lukacsevics. Carburetor.
*1,191,156. July 18, 1916. Ciglia & Pelletier. Suction intenSifying carburetor.
*1,191,522. July 18, 1916. Lamb. Carburetor.
1,191,097. July 11, 1916. Spiers. Carburetor.
Re.6,004 (orig. 142,545). Aug. 11, 1874. Lockwood. Carburetor.
C1'088-reterence patent8, claS8 48, subcla88 156.

57,639
65,296
66,068
67,216
73,900
81,590
87,556
89,536
Re.3,779
110,005
115,182
133,957

210,717
222,822
242,379
249,160
288,868
308,693
312,512
336,574
340,221
378,647
403,377
423,393

138,715
143,534
150,827
167,150
169,423
Re.6,878
176,156
176,395
191,789
192,399
193,911
204,413

SUBCLASS

157,

15,829. Sept. 30, 1856.
20,534. June 15, 1858.
46,771. Mar. 14, 1865
84,021. Nov. 10, 1868.
91,588. June 22, 1869.
minating gas.

427,197
429,426
488,454
522,418
538,791
541,441
548,689
596,658
598,393
62 ,222
635,456
662,922

688,931
697,807
706,482
712,803
768,063
772,673
78 ,427
793,776
810,087
813,796
817.592
844,996

846,679
852,780
854,604
860,334
886,403
913,857
933,064
951,779
964,165
973,240
982,490
989,980

1,004,661
1,009,121
1,024,501
1,060,545
1,069,068
1,075,598
1,076,401
1,104,560
1,105,160
1,173,469

CARBUllETORS, CAPILLARY, SPffiAL PASSAGE.

Varney. Hydrocarbon-vapor lamp.
Absterdam. Apparatus for manufacturing gas.
Bassett. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
Thompson. Improved gas machine.
Alsop. I mproved apparatus for manufacturing illu-

110

AERONAUTICS.

123,539. Feb. 6, 1872. Wilkinson. Improvement in carburetors.
126,189. Apr. 30, 1872. Cross. Improvement in carburetors.
149,766. Apr. 14, 1874. Palmer. I mprovement in carburetor s.
160,410. Mar. 2, 1875. Ferguson. Improvement in carburetors or hydrocarbon diffusers.
163,528. May 18, 1875. Reed. Improvement in gas carburetor s. .
172,074. Jan. 11, 1876. Barbarin & Roberts. Improvement in carburetor s.
184,220. Nov. 7, 1876. De St. Aubin. Improvement in carburetors.
224,592. Feb. 17, 1880. Heywood & Boeklen. Carbureting apparatus.
238,020. Feb. 22, 1881. Anthony & Frost. Apparatus for producing illuminating gas or vapor.
238,386. Mar. I, 1881. Guthrie. Carburetor.
261,011. July 11, 1882. Matthews & Holt. Gas machine.
286,865. Oct. 16, 1 83. Taylor. Gas machine.
341,739. May 11, 1886. Fagan. H ydroca rbon-vapor stove.
375,055. Dec. 20, 1 87. Dudley. Carburetor.
385,934. July 10, 1888. Ives. Caturator for the production of vapor blowpipe flames.
675,566. June 4, 1901. Lawrence. Carburetor.
699,965. May 13, 1902. Mangin. Carburetor.
780,673. Jan. 24, 1905. Lawrence. Carburetor.
798,418. Aug. 29, 1905. Johnson. Carburetor.
839,116. Dec. 25, 1906. Compton. Carburetor.
990,159. Apr. 18, 1911. Olsen. Carburetor.
Re. 3,124 (orig. 46,771). Sept. 15, 1868. Bassett. Improvement in appar atus
for carbureting air or gases.
Cross-refer ence patents, class 48, s1tbclass 157.
55,324
115,988
156,142

170,097
193,232
224,576

385,934
501,778

746,173
759,539

767,485
798,150

883,171
969,941

1,025,553
Re. 4,476

SUBCLASS 158, CAllBURETORS, CAPILLAllY, VERTICAL SCREEN.

46,432. Feb. 14, 1865. Buckland. Improvecl apparatus for carbureting air .
48,706. July 11, 1865. Birchard. Improved apparatu ' for carbureting a ir.
49,705. Sept. 5, 1865. Boynton. Improved gaslight multiplier.
53,798. Apr. 10, 1866. Fairbanks. Improved apparatus for carbureting air .
55,778. June 19, 1866. Messenger. Improved apparatus for carbureting air,
gas, etc.
. 57,686. Sept. 4, 1866. Divine. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
57,729. Sept. 4, 1866. Johnston. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas.
57,812. Sept. 4, 1866. Worrall. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas.
58,209. Sept. 23, 1866. Boynton. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas.
58,861. Oct. 16, 1866. McGreary. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
60,857. Jan. 1, 1867. Burridge. Improved apparatus for charging gas or air
with hydrocarbon vapor.
61,309. Jan. 22, 1867. Boynton. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas
and air.
69,621. Oct. 8, 1867. Boynton. Improved gaslight multiplier.
70,512. Nov. 5, 1867. Boynton. Improvement in carbureting gases and air.
78,185. May 26, 1868. Childs. Improved gas apparatus.
81,238. Aug. 18, 1868. Woodward. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting.
90,445. May 25, 1869. Groat. Improved gas machine.
100,274. Mar. 1, 1870. Dunderdale. Improved carburetor.
107,262. Sept. 13, 1870. Hyde. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air and gas.
112,026. Feb. 21, 1871. Fisher. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
and generating gas.
127,409. June 4, 1872. Fisher. Improvement in carburetors.
128,356. June 25, 1872. Braun. Improvement in carbur etors.
129,566. July 16, 1872. Hyde. Improvement in carburetors.
135,806. Feb. 11, 1873. Holmes. Imprm'ement in carbureting apparatus.
147,244. Feb. 10, 1874. Davey & Gr iswold. Improvement in car buretors.

AERONAUTICS.

111

148,602. Mar. 17, 1874. Fisber & Darby. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
156,820. Nov. 10, 1874. Reed. Improvement in gas carburetors.
164,423. June 15, 1875. Caldwell. Improvement in machines for manufacturing vapor gas.
172,144. Jim. 11, 1876. Meredith. Improvement in carburetors.
176,425. Apr. 25, 1876. Caldwell. Improvement in gas carburetors.
193,561. July 24, 1877. Sir~. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting gas.
205,201. June 25, 1878. 1Il0rehouse. Improvement in carburetors.
209,505. Oct. 29, 1878. Otten & Kluber. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting illuminating gas.
216,191. June 3, 1879. Keller. Impro,ement in gas carburetors.
219,590. Sept. 16, 1879. Morehou e. Improyement in carburetors.
220,695. Oct. 21, 1879. Bean. Improvement in carburetors.
223,490. J an. 13, 1880. De Witt. Carburetors.
226,820. Apr. 20, 1880. Ferguson. Gas carburetor.
237,752. Feb. 15, 1881. Keller. Gas carburetor.
259,921. June 20, 1882. Reznor. Ail' CUl·buretor.
268,910. Dec. 12, 1882. Lacy. Carburetor.
278,529. May 29, 1883. Frost. Appar atus for producing illuminating gas or
vapor.
286,515. Oct. 9, 1883. Weston. Apparatus for increa ing the illuminating
power of gas.
300,757. June 24, 1884. Bois. Gas apparatus.
312,1 6. Feb. 10, 1885. Butler. Apparatus for carbureting ail' and gas.
354,574. Dec. 21, 1886. O'Connor. Carburetor.
359,585. Mar. 15, 1887. Weil. Carburetor.
366,664. July 19, 1887. Hickel. Gas carburetor.
382,819. May 15, 1888. Marks. Carburetor.
431,059. July 1, 1890. Keller. Carburetor.
4.40,486. Nov. 11, 1890. Love. Carburetor.
457,484. Aug. 11, 1891. Stringfellow. Apparatus for the manufacture of gas.
473,498. Apr. 26, 1892. Cruttenden. Carburetor.
499,635. June 13, 1893. Keller. Carburetor.
501,154. July 11, 1893. McCrory & Houze. Carburetor.
515,287. Feb. 20, 1894. Cabri~Gardien . Ca!·buretor.
522,574. July 3, 1894. Burrows. Carburetor.
522,968. July 17, 1894. Clarke & Griffen. Apparatus for carbureting ail'.
550.317. Nov. 26, 1895. Callahan. Carburetor.
5 9,094. Aug. 31, 1897. Ormerod. Carburetor.
590,893. Sept. 28, 1897. Ladd. Method of anel apparatus for manufacturing
gas.
620,496. Feb. 28, 1899. Raven~z. Carburetor.
626,176. May 30, 1899. Logan. Carburetor.
633,287. Sept. 19, 1899. Lewis & Bailey. Carburetor.
661,697. Nov. 13, 1900. Jeffery. Carburetor.
666,483. Jan. 22, 1901. Wilkinson. Carburetor.
678,493. July 16, 1901. Jackson. Carburetor.
6 0,941. Aug. 20, 1901. Sargent. Carbureto!·.
699,357. May 6, 1902. Wilkinson et al. Carburetor.
717,444. Dec. 30, 1902. Nagel. Carburetor.
725,148. Apr. 14, 1903. Ruthven. Carburetor.
726,671. Apr. 28, 1903. Gemmer. Vaporizer for explosive engines.
750,311. Jan. 26, 1904. Severance. Carburetor.
765,351. July 19, 1904. Avery & Smith. Carburetor.
773,682. Nov. 1, 1904. Severance. Carburetor.
777,220. Dec. 13, 1904. Patee. Carburetor for explosive engines.
778,686. Dec. 27, 1904. Loewenstein. Carburetor.
783.648. Feb. 28, 1905. Severance et a1. Carburetor.
796,557. Aug. 8, 1905. Bockoven. Carburetor.
801,044. Oct. 3, 1905. Parsons. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
820,036. May 8, 1906. Burch. Carburetor.
827,643. July 31, 1906. Lawrence. Carburetor.
832,547. Oct. 2, 1906. Hooper. Carburetor.
843,112. Feb. 5, 1907. Sevet'allce. Carburetor.
863,154. Aug. 13, 1907. Cox. Carbur etor.

112

ARRON AUTICS.

887,017. May 5, 1908. Puddington. Carburetor.
982,490. Jan. 24, 1911. Haywood. Carburetor.
1,011,244. Dec. 12, 1911. PUddington. Carburetor.
1,046,653. Dec. 10, 1912. Ruthven. Carburetor.
1,063,900. June 3, 1913. Whitacre. Carburetor.
1,065,331. June 17, 1913. Rubesky. Carburet or.
1,070,514. Aug. 19, 1913. Myers. Carburetor.
1,093,718. 'Apr. 21, 1914. lUyers. Carburetor.
1,104,427. July 21, 1914. Kendall. Apparatu for carbureting air.
1,116,861. Nov. 10, 1914. Wi! on. Carbur etor.
1,157,588. Oct. 19, 1915. Rubesky. Carburetor.
Re. 2,375 (48,705). Oct. 16, 1866. Boynton. Impro,ement in apparatus for carbureting ga .
Re.2,376 (58,209) . Oct. 16, 1866. Boynton. I mproved apparatu for carbureting gas.

Cross-reference patents, class 48, subclass 158.
31,720
35,984
45,729
46,770
48,391
54,132
107,743

115,798
128,321
132,132
133,118
140,998
163,535
177,191

177,909
190,673
191,381
192,825
193,934
197,944
206,999

207,8 6
226,875
252,307
278,281
303,927
336,572
424,654

451,036
509,174
528, 2
563,799
595,658
623,725
626,193

692,518
734,772
779,906
832,330
843,554
857,130
855,407

951,779
979,761
994,985
1,089,471

SUBCLASS 159, CAllBUBETORS, CAPlLLARY, ZIGZAG PASSAGE.

26,458. Dec. 13, 1859. Bronson. Hydrocarbon-vapor apparatus.
49,596. Aug. 22, 1865. Mille. Improved apparntu for carbureting air.
56,503. July 17, 1866. Wright. Improved apparatu for carbureting gas.
60,417. Dec. 11, 1866. Pickering. Impr oved apparatus for charging air with
gasoline.
83,730. Nov. 3, 1868. Richard. Improyed apparatus for carbureting air.
84,814. Dec. 8, 1868. Fo tel' & Ganster. I mproved apparatus for illuminating
r ailroad cars, steamers, etc.
92,635. JU'lY 13, 1869. Nichols. Improyed carburetor for air and gas.
106,389. Aug. 16, 1870. Millward. Improv meut in carbureting apparatus.
114,538. May 2, 1 71. Simonds. Ga machine.
126,024. Apr. 23, 1872. Coleman. Improvement in gas carburetors.
131,157. Sept. 10, 1872. Fell. Improyement in carbureting illuminating gas.
143,426. Oct. 7, 1873. Sloper. Improvement in portable gas machines.
145,248. Dec. 2, 1873. Simmons. Improvement in carburetors.
151,625. June 2, 1874. RuthYen. Improvement in carburetors.
167,592. Sept. 7, 1875. Westcott. Improvement in carburetors.
181,666. Au"". 29, 1876. Geisenberger. Improvement in carburetors.
203,371. May 7, 1878. Reed. Improvement in carburetors.
203,458. May 7, 1878. Hughes. Improvement in carburetors.
214,711. Apr. 22, 1 79. Rutlwen . Impro\-ement in carburetors and r egulators.
229,346. June 29, 1880. Westinghou e. Carburetor.
231,635. Aug. 24, 1880. Wes t. Apparatus for carbureting air or gases for illuminating purposes.
281,108. July 10, 1883. Mills. Carburetor.
312,836. Feb. 24, 1 85. Frost. Carburetor.
315,747. Apr. 14, 1885. Deb-Yiler. Gas generator.
328,359. Oct. 13, 1885. Stubbers. AutomatiC gas machine.
341,299. May 4, 1886. Wolford. Carburetor.
336,337. Jan. 18, 1 87. Stanour. Carburetor.
359.646. Mar. 22, 1 7. Sumerwell. Carburetor.
366,168. July 5, 18 7. Huber . Gas-generating machine.
427,487. May 6, 1890. Tibbets. Carburetor.
6 3.401. Sept. 24, 1901. Houze. Carburetor.
710,330. Sept. 30, 1902. Marks. Carburetor for explosive engines.
712.169. Oct. 28, 1902. Wright. Carburetor.
730,627. June 9, 1903. Esser. Carburetor.
756,381. Apr. 5, 1904. Lawrence. Carburetor.
773,679. Nov. 1, 1904. Sale & Hoag. Car buretor.

113

ABRON AUTICS.

783,790. Feb. 28, 1905. Kline. Gas-enriching machine.
817,218. Apr. 10, 1906. Brown. Oarburetor.
818,207. Apr. 17, 1906. Verret & Palmer. Oarburetor.
838,719. Dec. 18, 1906. Kelley. Oarburetor.
964,165. July 12, 1910. Kell ey. Oa rbureto r.
975,635. Nov. 15, 1910. Potthast. Oarburetor.
1,050,322. Jan. 14, 1913. Woodworth. Oarburetor.
1,075,396. Oct. 14, 1913. Boatwright. Oil burner.
1,106,070. Aug. 4, 1914. Andres. Oarburetor.
1,164,215. Dec. 14, 1915. Rodrigues & Schmitt. Oarburetor.
CToss-ret el'ence patents, class 48, subclass 159 .

131,815
154,475
164,360
16 ,048
R e. 6,865

221,680
291,676
327,981
336,378

353,499
395,152
423,367
540,536

725,148
763,965
765,351
787,732

773,682
7 0,355
7 3,648
807,131

820,036
820,554
863,154
885,832

959,350
944,482
1,070,514
1,075,598

SUBCLASS 160, CARBUBETORS, GR,WIT'.

50,250. Oct. 3, 1865. Irwin. I mpro,ed appa ratus for ca rbureting air.
51.841. Jan. 2, 1866. Loveless. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
52,946. Feb. 27, 1 66. Ohamberlin. I mproyed appa r atu fo r carbureting gas
fo r illuminating.
55.950. June 26, 1 66. Brown. I mpro,ed apparatus for carbureting air.
66,071. June 25, 1867. Ba sett. Impro,ement in the manufacture of illuminating gas.
83.026. Oct. 13, 1868. Bas ett. Improvement in gas generatol·s.
177,909. 1\1ay. 26, 1876. Williams. Impt'oyement in !l'as-making apparatus.
897,255. Feb. 5, 1889. Stubbers. Gasoline appa r atus for illuminating and
beating purposes.
421,834. Feb. 18, 1890. Hollingsworth. Appllratus for vaporizing liquid
hydrocarbon and supplying the ,apon; to burners.
448.652. Mar. 24, 1891. Hollings\yorth. Vapor stove.
451,050. Apr. 28, 1891. Holling wor th. Starter for vapor stoves.
454.014. June 9, 1891. Marsh. Vapor sto'e.
456,510. July 21, 1891. Davis. Apparatus for vaporizing and feeding hydrocarbon.
470.756. 1\1ar. 15, 1892. Hollingsworth. VIlpor stove.
471.289. 1\10.1'. 22, 1892. Hollings,,;·orth. Vapor sto'e.
479,315. July 19, 1892. Stockstrom. "'I"apor sto,e.
4 0,2 1. Aug. 9, 1892. Ruppel. Vapor stoye.
4 3.051. Sept. 20, 1892. Flick. Vapor sto'e.
489,477. J an. 10, 1893. HOllingsworth. Yapor sto,e.
490.0 5. J an. 17, 1893. Ramo er. Vapor stove.
490,655. Jan. 31, 1893. Hollingsworth. Vapor stove.
490.656. Jan. 31, 1893. Hollingsworth. Vapor sto'-e.
493.186. Mar. 7, 1893. Sayers. Gasoli ne-burner attachment.
525.331. Sept. 4, 1894. Oampany. Vapor burner.
525,350. Sept. 4, 1894. Lindemann. Vapor-burning appa r atus.
528,795. Nov. 6, 1894. P almer & Munro. Go. 'oline stove.
541,530. June 25, 1 95. Goergen. New-proces ' y(l1)Or burner.
555,436. Feb. 25, 1896. Davis.' Evaporator burner or st.ove.
555,450. Feb. 25, 1 96. J ohnson. Vapor stoye.
570,482. Nov. 3, 1896. Hutcbins. Ga~oline stove.
608,388. Aug. 2, 1 98. Brown. Gasoline stove.
640,832. Jan. 9, 1900. Thayer. Oarburetor.
720,968. Feb. 17, 1903. Rife & Oarper. Oarburetor.
739.144. Sept. 15, 1903. Blackford. GaSOline burner.
834.614. Oct. 30, 1906. Gray. Oarburetor.
944,070. Dec. 21, 1909. Best. Hydrocarbon burner.
ff52,412. 1\10.1'. 15, 1910. Blackford. Gasoline burner.
CTos8-Te!m'ence IJatents, class

47,257

187,415
72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2-8

48, subclaS8 160.
490,415

807,131

.------------- ----------------

114

------------------------------------------ ------------------------.~

AERONAUTICS.
SUBCLASS 163, CAllBUBETORS, OSMOTIC.

236,433.
291,128.
533,275.
625,084.
671,052.

J an.
Jan.
Jan.
May
Apr.

11, 1881. H oard. Carburetor.
I, 1 4. Baker. Carburetor.
29, 1895. Collet & Merichen ki. Carbur etor.
16, 1 99. Brown & Dixon. Carburetor.
2, 1901. Kurz. Carburetor.
SUBCLASS 1 64, CARBURETORS, PIVOTED.

66,068. June 25, 1867. Ba ett. Improvement in carbureting gases.
78.600. June 2, 1 68. Malcolm. I mproved apparatus for generating gas.
169,423. Nov. 2, 1875. Covel. Proce s and apparatu for enriching gas or air
with a definite and regulated percentage of hydrocarbon vapor.
188,667. Mar. 20, 1 77. Pierce & Smiley. Carburetor.
191,789. Ju ne 12,1 77. Winn. I mprovement in gas and air carburetors.
192,399. June 26, 1877. Winn. I mprovement in gas and air carburetor s.
204,413. May 28, 1878. Dusenberry & Winn. I mprovement in gas and air carburetors.
294,863. Mar. 11, 1884. Gairing & Lehmann. Carbur etor.
Re.6,878. J an. 25. 1876. Covel. Improvement in proce· es and apparatus for
manufacturing illuminating gas.
.
SUBCLASS 165, CAllBURETORS, PIYOTED, REVOLVING.

12,535. Mar. 13, 1855. Cuningham. Benzole vapor apparatus.
13,010. June 5, 1855. McDougall. Hydrocarbon-vapor apparatu .
35,144. May 6, 1862. Drake. Impl·oved apparatus for carbureting air.
43,264. June 21, 1 64. Simonds. Improved apparatus for carbonizing air fo r
illuminating purposes.
44,060. Sept. 6, 1 64. Archer. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
44,560. Oct. 4, 1864. Simonds. Improved appar atus for carbonizing air for
illuminating PUt·po es.
50,076. Sept. 19, 1865. McAvoy. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
50,103. Sept. 26, 1865. Drennan. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
50,675. Oct. 31, 1865. Bassett. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
50,905. Nov. 14, 1865. Chase. Improved apparat us for carbureting air.
50,987. Nov. 14, 1 65. Cha e. Improved appar a tus for carbureting air.
51,946. J an. 9, 1866. Hutchinson & McAvoy. I mproved apparatus for carbureting air.
52.087. Jan. 9, 1866. Spence. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
53.504. Mar. 27, 1 66. Thompson. I mproved apparatus for carbureting air.
57,164. Aug. 14, 1 66. :McAvoy. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
57.442. Aug. 21, 1 66. McDonald. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
57,543. Aug. 28, 1866. Mihan. Improved apparatus fo r carbureting air.
57,788. Sept. 4, 1 66. Spence. Improved apparatus fo r carbur eting air.
61,739. Feb. 5, 1867. Hutchinson & l\IcAvoy. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
61,887. Feb. 5, 1867. Spence. Improved ga apparatus.
63,667. Apr. 9, 1867. Stevens. I mproved machine for carbureting air to produce inflammable gas.
64,382. Apr. 30, 1 67. Thompson. I mpr oved gas gener ator and carburetor.
76,114. Mar. 31, 1868. Stratton. I mproved apparatu for ca rbureting air.
76,182. Mar. 31, 1868. Ganster. I mproved apparatus for generating illuminating gas.
78,870. June 16, 1868. Ganster. I mprovement in the manufacture of illumina ting gas.
81,232. Aug. 18, 1 68. Van der W eyde. I mproved apparatus for the manufacture of illumina ting ga .
81,736. Sept. 1, 1 68. Bas ett. I mpr oved proce s and materials for carbureting gases.
82,786. Oct. 6, 1868. Bancroft. I mproved gas machine.
84,941. Dec. 15, 1868. Foster & Ganster. Improved portable gas apparatus.
85,104. Dec. 22, 1868. Lawler & Gibson. Improved gas machine.
87,299. Feb. 23, 1869. SchwippeJ. I mproved machine for making gas from
volatile oils.
90,259. May 18, 1869. H are. Improved gas machine.

AERONAUTICS.

115

97,284. Nov. 30, 1869. Dunderdale. Improved a 1Jparatus for producing illuminating gas.
100,080. Feb. 22, 1870. Snodgl"aSS. I mproved portHble gas generator.
103,036. May 17, 1870. Fogarty. Impr oved gas generator.
104,126. June 14, 1870. Douglas. Improved hydrocarbon vapor machine for
illuminating purposes.
1013,937. Nov. 1, 1870. Richar d. I mpr ovement in gas apparatus.
109,568. Nov. 22, 1870. Van Houten. I mprovement in gas machine.
120,824. Nov. 14, 1871. McMillen. Improvement in gas machines.
132.025. Oct. 8, 1872. Rigod. Improvement in carburetors.
135,020. Jan. 21, 1873. Van Houten. I mprovement in machines for carbureting air.
151.392. May 26, 1874. Horning. I mprovement in carburetors.
165,564. July 13, 1875. Gray & Lusby. Improvement in air carburetors.
166,427. Aug. 3, 1875. Stombs. Improvement in automatic rotary carbur etors.
]67,811. Sept. 14, 1875. 'Vestcott. I mprovement in carburetor s.
169,105. Oct. 26, 1875. Hyams. Improvement in carburetors.
1 2,598. Sept. 26, 1876. Pierce. I mprovement in carbur etors.
187,667. Feb. 20, 1877. Paquette. Improvement in carburetors.
]96,946.
Jov. 6, 1877. Stratton. Impro\'ement in carburetors.
] 9 ,270. Dec. 18, 1877. Bossert. Impt'ovement in carburetors.
216,879. June 24, 1879. J\Ioffatt. Improvement in air-carbureting apparatus.
223,582. Jan. 13, 1 O. Dewitt. Carburetor.
226.581. Apr. 13, 1 O. Wright. Carburetor.
244,387. July 19, 1881. Hoare! & Wiggin. Apparatus for carbureting gas or
air.
249,163. Nov. 8, 1881. De Witt. Rotary carburetor.
251,329. Dec. 20, 1 1. Winn. Carburetor cylinder for air-gas machines.
262,651. Aug. 15, 18 2. De Witt. Carburetor.
262,991. Aug. 22, 1882. Smith et al. Carbmetor.
264,406. Sept. 12, 1 82. Frail. Carbureting apparatus.
272,002. Feb. 6, 1883. Vigreux. Apparatus for producing cmrents of pure or
cal'bureted air.
321,959. July 14, 1885. Frail. Gas machine.
329,664. Nov. 3, 18, 3. J\IcNett. Carbmetol".
350,382. Oct. 5, 1885. J\Ierritt. Carburetor.
356,071. J an. 11, 1 7. Hyams. Apparatus for treatment of natural gas.
356.950. Feb. 1, 1887. J\IcNett. Carburetor.
360,240. Mar. 29, 1887. Ordonez y Ponce. Gas generator.
395,616. Jan. 1, 1889. Dykes. Carburetor.
531,780. Jan. 1, 1895. Cook. Carburetor.
539.773. May 21, 1895. Lawrence. Carburetor .
593.284. Nov. 9, 1897. Spacke. Carbureter.
596,321. Dec. 28, 1897. BulJey. Gas-generating machine.
604,948. J\Iay 31, 1898. Van Vrieslancl. Carburetor.
6] .002. Jan. 17, 1899. Braclley. Carburetor.
631,002. Aug. 15, 1899. Van Vriesland. Carburetor.
649. 65. May 15, 1900. Herhagen & Van Gink. Carburetor.
672,507. Apr. 23, 1901. Johnson. Carburetor.
6 ,408. Dec. 10, 1901. Gohler. Carburetor.
696,187. Mar. 22, 1902. Page & Wood. Oil atomizer and mixer for vapor
engines.
711,429. Oct. 14, 1902. Leckband. CarburetOI·.
743,085. ?ilov. 3, 1903. Kahle. Carbureting apparatus.
779,906. Jan. 10, 1905. Burch. Carburetor.
801,606. Oct. 10, 1905. Picard. Carbureted-air machine.
866,115. Sept. 17, 1907. Dock. Vaporizer.
885,905, Apr. 28, 1908. Avel·ell. Carburetor.
901,237. Oct. 13, 1908. Graumuller. Carburetor.
934,981. Sept. 21, 1909. Munger. Carburetor.
942,181. Dec, 7, 1909. J\IcGuire & Hammick. Ca rburetor.
969,941. Sept. 13, 1910. Cox. Carburetor.
1 ,009,629. Nov. 21, 1911. Bardill. Carburetor.
1 ,144,477. June 29, 1913. KelJogg. Carburetor .
1,156,716. Oct. 12, 1915. Shores. Carburetor.

116

AERONAUTICS.

Re. 1,819 (9,967). Aug. 30, 1853. Drake. Benzol -yapor apparatus.
Re.2,069 (45,456) . ept. 5, 1864. l\lcA,oy & Hutchinson. Improved apparatus
f Ol' car bureting air.
Cr088-1'eterence patents, class

56,116
57,940

82,244
138,409

153,876
1 9,490

692,860
754,774

48, subclass 165.
':10,70
1,064,273

1,123,876
1,137,238

SUBCLASS 16 6, C.ll!B1JRETORS, SUB:llERGED BL\ST.

43,948. Aug. 23, 1864. l\1cAvoy. Impro,ement in apparatu for carbureting
air.
45,206. Nov. 22, 1864. McAvoy. Improyed apparatus for carburetin"" air.
45,568. Dec. 20, 1 64. Steven. Improyed apparatus for vaporizing and
aerating volatile hydrocarbon.
46.2 0. Feb. 7, ] 65. Terry. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
47,272. Apr. 18, 1 65. Bas tt. Imp r oved apparatus for carburetinO" air.
47,679. 1\1ay 9, 1865. Dun comb. Improyed appa ratu fOr carburetin "" air.
51,128. Nov. 28, 1 65. Bickford. Impro\"ecl apparatus fo r carburetin g air.
52,876. Feb. 27, 1 66. l\l~·er. Improved machine for charging air with hydrocarbon vapors.
53,8,13. Apr. 10, 1 66. Loveless. Improyed apparatus for carbureting air.
57,738. Sept. 4, 1866. Lipps. ImprO\'ed barrel for petroleum, etc.
5 ,471. Oct. 2, 1 66. Patter on. ImproyeLI apparatu for carbureting air, etc.
[,8.727. Oct. 9, 1 66. Hutchinson. Improy d apparatus for generating steam.
59,446. Jo\". 6, 1 66. Pease. Improvement in carburetors.
(;2,363. Feb. 26, 1 67. Rand. Improvement in the manufacture of illuminating gas.

62.364. Feb. 26, 1 67. Rand. Impro,ement in apparatus for carburetin"" air.
66,041. June 25, 1867. Rand. I mproyed method of making illuminating gas.
66,749. July 16, 1867. Springer & l\lcDonald. Impro" ed apparatus for. carbureting air.
67,971. Aug. 20, 1 67. Fraser. Improved carburetin g apparatus.
74.132. Feb. 4, 1868. Prichard. Improvement in ga.· machine .
75,468. l\lar. 10, 1868. Sang tel". Improvement in machine:; for car bu reting
air.
75.469. l\lar. 10, 1868. Sangster. Improved machine for carburetin"" air.
79,048. June 28, 1868. Appleby. I mproved cm'bur tor.
79,290. June 23, 1 G. Willoughby. Improved carburetor.
80,404. July 28, 1 6. Grabanl. Improved ""as machine.
83.344. Oct. 20, 1868. Wain. Improved ""as machine.
83.419. Oct. 27, 1 68. Stebbins. Improve<1 portable ga apparatus.
84,283. -0'-' 2- 1 68. Kitchen. Improved portable gas apparatus.
1,
90.012. May 11, 1 69. l\lix. ImprO\'ed carburetor.
95,412. Oct. 5, 1 69. Barbarino Improved 'apparatus for carburetin"" ai r
and gas.
96,074. Oct. 26, 1 69. Barbarin. I mproved apparatu for ca rbureting ail'.
97,2 5. Nov. 30, 1869. Eberts & Fanning. Improved gas machine for carbureting ail'.
98,462. Jan. 4, 1870. Ball. Improved gas machine.
128,199. June 18, 1872. Gearing. Improvement in apparatus for the manufacture of gas from oils.
146,082. Dec. 30, 1873. Lyman. Improvement in carburetors.
150,449. May 5, 1874. Wheeler. I mprovemeut in gas machines 01' carburetors.
155.096. Sept. 15, 1874. McHenry. Improvement in carburetors.
155,155.
ept. 22, 1 74. Harrington. Improvement in carburetor . .
157,781. Dec. 15, 1 74. Bean. Improvement in carbureters for gas and air.
157,861. Dec. 15, 1874.
eedles. Improvement in air-carbureting gas machines.
164,558. June 15, 1875. Henderson. Improvement in carburetors.
] 65,050. Ju ne 29, 1 75. Allen. Improvement in carburetors.
165, 62. July 20, 1 75. Pierce. I mprovement in carburetors.
166,508. Au"". 10, 1 75. Da chbach. Improvement in carburetors.
173,933. Feb. 22, 1876. Forbes. Improvement in carburetors.
174,054. Feb. 29, 1876. Allen. I mpr ovement in carburetors.
0

AERONAUTICS.

117

180,359. July 25, 1876. McMillen & Minor. Improvement in carburetors.
1 1,926. Sept. 5, 1876. Edgar. Improvement in carburetors.
193,007. July 10, 1877. Lamb. Apparatus for carbureting air.
194,733. Aug. 28, 1877. Sheparel. Improvement in carburetors.
199,246. Jan. 15, 1878. Wolle & Munyon. Improvement in apparatus for
carbureting air.
203,579. May 14, 1878. Battey. I mprovement in carburetors.
261,507. July 18, 1882. Wittamer. Apparatus for the manufacture of illuminating gas.
273,852. Mar. 13, 1883. Juelel. Gas machine.
280,201. June 26, 18 3. Martin. Apparatus for the manufacture of air gas.
29 .058. May 6, 1884. Beebe. Carburetor.
302,450. July 22, 1884. Valentine. Apparatus for carbureting and firing
fu rnaces.
307,042. Oct. 21, 1884. Herzog. Process of anel apparatus for obtaining
illuminating gas.
327,981. Oct. 13, 1885. Andrus. Carburetor.
339,177. Apr. 6, 18 6. Herlehy & l\IcGinnis. Natural-gas carburetor.
362,234. May 3, 1887. Stauber. Gas machine.
376,248. Jan. 10, 1888. Lothammer. Carburetor.
377,607. F eb. 7, 1888. Foster. Carburetor.
382,585. May 8, 1888. Benz. Carburetor.
414,370. Nov. 5, 1889. Blackmore. Tinner's solelering apparatus.
415,978. Nov. 26, 1889. R egan. Carburetor for gas engines.
437,454. Sept. 30, 1890. R anney. Carburetor.
474, 38. lIlay 17, 1892. Lambert. Carburetor.
484,949. Oct. 25, 1892. Clingman. Carburetor.
4 8,881. Dec. 27, 1 92. Falley. Carburetor.
490.972. Jan. 31, 1893. Love. Apparatus for carbureting gas or air.
493,16D. 1\Iar. 7, 1893. Irgens. Apparatus for carbureting air.
504,137. Aug. 29, 1893. Savill. Carburetor.
505,700. Sept. 26, 1893. Cornish. Process of anel apparatus for carbureting
air.
511,950. Jan. 2, 1894. Hibbs. Process of anel apparatus for carbureting air.
527,085. Oct. 9, 1 94. Sprague & Guthrie. Carburetor.
527,639. Oct. 16, 1894. Westcott. Carburetor.
544,945. Aug. 20, 1895. Aldrich. Apparatus for carbmeting air.
559,341. Apr. 28, 1896. Parr & Avery. Carbmetor.
568,672. Sept. 29, 1896. Garreel. Machine for generating gas.
569,198. Oct. 13, 1 96. Henlein. Incandescent oil lighting.
569,460. Oct. 13, 1 96. Ingraham. Ca.rburetor.
572,837. Dec. 8, 1896. Staeele. Carburetor.
575,595. Jan. 18, 1 97. Cornish. Carburetor.
578.3'17. l\Iar. 9, 1 97. Mitchell. Gas-generating machine.
588,200. Aug. 17, 1897. Van Syke. Blowpipe.
592,579. Oct. 26, 1897. Balkam. Carburetor.
593,6 2. Nov. 16, 1897. Oliver. Gas machine.
59 .393. Feb. 1, 1808. Sl1ms. Gas generator.
600,221. Mar. 8, 1898. Grey. Apparatus for makin'" gas.
607,417. July 19, 1898. Bailey. Process of anel apparatus for treating cruele
oil in manufact uring gas and lubricating oil.
610,159. Aug. 30, 1898. Speer. Carburetor.
615,093. Nov. 29, 1898. McIntyre. Internal separator.
6U),281. F eb. 14, 1899. Cornish. Carburetor.
620,595. 1\1ar. 7, 1899. Lippitt. Carbtu'etor.
620,646. 1\1ar. 7, 1899. Filley. Carburetor.
G28,639. July 11, 1899. Steele. Carburetor.
639,481. Dec. 19, 1899. Wopert. Carburetor.
643.206. Feb. 13, 1900. Russell. Carburetor.
645,485. 1\1ar. 13, 1900. McAllister. Carburetor.
65-1,378. July 24, 1900. Barckdall. Carburetor.
656,409. Aug. 21, 1900. Laraway & Houser. Carburetor.
659,987. Oct. 16, 1900. Ray. Carburetor for explosive engines.
662,304. Nov. 20, 1900. Heenstiern a . Carburetor.
664,457. Dec. 25, 1900. Bennett. Carburetor.
671,042. Apr. 2, 1901. Bar ckelall & Wood,,·ard. Carburetor.

118
673,798.
673.799.
676,054.
677,305.
679,019.
68 , 14.
698,953.
704,034.
707,973.
'; 10,646.
718,361.
723,487.
725,366.
749,315.
750,433.
755,167.
757,935.
777,908.
781,701.
782,788.
793,786.
805,138.
812,753.

AERONAUTIOS.

1I1ay 7, 1901. K empshnll. Carburetor.
May 7, 1901. Reenstierna. Carburetor.
June 11, 1901. Thomas. Carburetor.
June 25, 1901. Arnold. Carburetor.
July 23, 1901. Fischer. Car buretor.
Dec. 17, 19 1. AndresOll. Carburetor.
Apr. 29, 1902. Honts. Car buretor.
July 8, 1902. Head & Dovey. Carburetor.
Aug. 26, 1902. Leckband. Carburetor.
Oct. 7, 1902. Williams. Carburetor.
Jan. 13, 1903. Leckband. Apparatus for carburetin a air.
Mar. 24, 1903. Richards. Carbureting device for explo ive engines.
Apr. 14, 1903. Renstrom. Acetylene-gas generator.
Jan. 12, 1904. Mooers. Carbureting device for explosive engines.
Jan. 26, 1904. Corni h. Carburetor.
Mar. 22, 1904. Philipps. Carburetor.
Apr. 19, 1904. Lockhart. Carburetor.
Dec. 20, 1904. Lothammer. Carburetor.
Feb. 7, 1905. Walther. Carburetor.
Feb. 14, 1905. Mohr. Carburetor.
J uly 4, 1905. Helmle. Carburetor.
Nov. 21, 1905. Herrick & Lohrman. Carburetor.
Peb. 13, 1906. Kouns. Carbmetor for hydrocarbon engines.
~17,218. Apr. 10, 1.906. Brown. Carburetor.
823,382. June 12, 1906. Akeson. Carburetor.
826,936. July 24, 1906. Hinds. Cru·buretor.
829,375. Aug. 21, 1906. Garvey. Air carburetor.
840,115. Jan. I , 1907. Dawson. Gas generator.
862,196. Aug. 6, 1907. Peregrine. Carburetor.
913,733. l\Iar. 2, 1909. Kenwortby. Gas generator.
920,511. May 4, 1909. Wood. Carburetor.
932,478. Aug. 31, 1909. Laux. Carburetor.
932,871. Aug. 31, 1909. Kenworthy. Carburetor.
93 ,011. Oct. 26, 1909. l\-Iieville. Carburetor.
947,357. J an. 25, 1910. Steward. Carburetor.
950,825. Mar. I, 1910. Pill. Carbureting apparatus.
951,501. Mar. 8, 1910. Hancock & Arnold. Gas gener at or.
956,048. Apr. 26, 1910. Dawson. Carbureting apparfltus.
965,867. Aug. 2, 1910. Bustard. Carburetor.
988,398. Apr. 4, 1911. Stein. Carburetor.
989,848. Apr. 18, 1911. Kemp. Carburetor.
989,980. Apr. 18, 1911. Kemp. Carburetor.
994,574. June 6, 1911. Cox. Cru·buretor.
995,882. June 20, 1911. Lowry. Hydrocarbon lighting system.
1,002,791. Sept. 5, 1911. Voigt. Carburetor.
1,004,329. Sept. 26, 1911. Winter. Carbureting apparatus.
1,009,121. Nov. 21, 1911. Weiwoda. Carburetor.
1,027,340. May 21, 1912. Johnston. Carburetor.
1,027,456. May 28, 1912. Wood. Carburetor.
1,043,691. Nov. 5, 1912. Grandjean. Carburetor.
1,057,254. Mar. 25, 1913. McAndrews. Carburetor.
1,058,407. Apr. 8, 1913. Candlish. Carburetor.
1,069,068. July 29, 1913. Kemp. Carbureter.
1.069,335. Aug. 5, 1913. Johnson. Carburetor.
1,070,394. Aug. 19, 1913. Booth. Carburetor.
1,103,789. J uly 14, 1914. Macey. Carburetor.
1,105,160. July 28, 1914. Sanders. Carburetor.
1,109,777. Sept. 8, 1914. Muller. Carburetor.
1,156,924. Oct. 19, 1915. Nichols. Carburetor.
Re. 3,892 (95,412) . Mar. 22, 1870. Barbarin. I mprovement in apparatus for
carbureting ai r and gas.
Re. 6,376 (67,971 ) . Apr. 13, 1875. Fraser. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
Re. 6,431 (51,128). May 18, 1875. B ickford. I mprovement in appara tus for
carbureting a ir.
Re.13,498. Dec. 17, 1912. B ustard. Car buretor.
1,191,097. July 11, 1916. Spiers. Carbuetor.

,.-- - - - - - -- - - -

- -

- - - - - - -- - - - - --

- - - - - - -- -

119

AERONAUTICS.

01'oss-reference patents, class
8,433
32,222
38,357
42,469
55,395
57,551
63.511
66,545
66,777
67,216
76,535
78,600
80,268
82,359
96.073
97,283
105,190

107,853
110,946
116,563
117,998
125,194
127,031
130,164
138,160
142,545
150,827
151,557
156,463
164,825
167,170
175,827
176,955
178,973

188,667
512,270
221,942
515,440 .
233,978
518,582
306,485
522,418
307,132 Re.11 ,430
311,493
554,630
324,177
566,413
356,477
566,415
360,944
576,499
370,936
586,923
403,839
603,431
411,809
607,888
422,322
607,889
435,856
613,167
457.803
625,294
4 4;721
629,246
493,992
639,336

-

48, subclass
646,320
654,6 6
657,770
658,020
659,476
663,683
673,365
674,812
679,018
688,776
6 9,460
690,303
690,6 1
692,255
697,807
702,637
705,021

166.
706,454
707,467
707,897
716,227
745,489
749,768
762,477
772.551
784,599
817,21
828,334
836,795
844,995
853,196
860,522
871,480
887,017

906,548
912,468
929,135
931,386
941,393
953,606
940,916
947,639
951,590
1,005,491
1,014,133
1,044,594
1,062,273
1,065,819
1,091,784
1,095,510
1,107,489

SUBCLASS 107, CARTIURETORS, SUBMERGED BLAST, COIL.

50,029. Sept. 29, 1863. Pond & Richardson. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
114,316. May 2, 1871. 1\1ar1\s. Improvement in carburetors for air anel gas.
200,568. Feb. 19, 1878. Reed. Impt'o\7ement in c:1rbLlt·etors.
290,491. Dec. 18, 1 83. Snell. ME-ans for faCilitating the passage of oil
through pipes and making illuminating gas.
308,796. Dec. 2, 1 4. Ransom. Gas macbine.
314,412. Mar. 24, 18 5. Allender. Hydrocarbon-gas macbine.
451,218. Apr. 28, 1891. Bradley. Grass burner for railway tracks
502,781. Aug. 8, 1893. Smith. Carburetor.
615,100. Nov. 29, 1 98. Parrott. Carburetor.
632,376. Sept. 5, 1899. Stanley. Carburetor.
762,271. June 14, 1904. Bennett & Moorwood. Carburetor fo r motor cars.
773,322. Oct. 25, 1904. Hinman. Carburetor.
848,933. Apr. 2, 1907. Thi em. Carburetor,
865,060. Sept. 3, 1907. Rockwell. Carburetor.
895,273. Aug. 4, 1908. Keitel. Car bureting apparatus.

C1'Oss-ret el'ence patents, class 48, subclass 167.
53,481
67,576

168,290
272,848

275,268
596,536

t:i22,489

640,695

795,233

1,002,791

SUBCLASS 168, CARBURETORS, SURFaCE.

24,200. May 31, 1859. Covel. Hydrocarbon-vapor apparatus.
27,470. Mar. 13, 1860. Pease. Hydrocarbon-vapor apparatus.
46,302. Feb. 7, 1865. McAvoy. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
47,256. Apr. 11, 1865. Irwin. I mproved apparatus for cfil'bureting air.
47,550. May 2, 1865. Hurd. I mp roved apparatus for carbureting air.
53,979. Apr. 17, 1866. Hogan. Improved apparatus for carbureting gas.
58,559. Oct. 2, 1866. Stevens. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
61,004. Jan. 8, 1867. Gilbert et al. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
a ir.
61,656. Jan. 20, 1 67. Douglas & Walton. Improved apparatus for carbureting air .
64,156. Apr. 23, 1867. Simonds. Improved apparatus for carbureting a ir.
69,037. Sept. 17, 1867. Spence. I mproved hydrocarbon-vapor machine.
70,809. Nov. 12, 1867. Cozzens & J ones. Improved apparatus for carbureting
a il'.
89,665. May 5, 1869. H. J ohnson. I mproved apparatus for carbureting air
Ot' gas.
91,213. June 15, 1869. Covel. I mproved carburetor.
93,288. Aug. 3, 1869. Dyer. Improved gas ca r bu r etor.

120

AERONAUTICS.

96,364. Nov. 2, 1869. Tiffany. Improved apparatus for carbureting and applying air for lighting aud heating.
99,274. Jan. 25, 1870. Spence & Towsley. I mpr oved apparatus for carbureting
air.
105,378. July 12, 1870. Simonds. Improvement in carbureting apparatus.
105,994. Aug. 2, 1870. Spence. Improvement in am a r atus for carbureting air.
114,709. May 9, 1871. Rex. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting air.
114,787. May 16, 1871. Fitts. Improvement in appa ratus for car bureting air.
125,085. Mar. 26, 1872. Reznor. Improved apparatu fo r carbureting ai r.
151,153. May 19, 1874. Palmer. I mpr oyeml'nt in carburetors.
160,799. Mar. Ie, 1875. Vougt. Improvement in apparatu fo r the production
of gas from hydrocarbon liquid.
174,073. Feb. 29, 1 76. Gray. Improvement in carburetors.
183,884. Oct. 31, 1876. Bangs. Improvement in ga carburetors.
219,158. Sept. 2, 1879. Jackson. Improvement in carburetors.
234,055.
ov. 2, 1880. Orm by. Carbureting apparatu .
234,108. Nov. 2, 1 80. RuthYen. Carbureting apparatus.
238,141. Feb. 22, 1881. McKen ie & Ma on. Carburetor.
245,443. Aug. 9, 1881. Callahan. Carburetor.
288,952. Nov. 20, 1883. MUller. Combined gas engine and carbureting apparatus.
302,442. July 22, 1884. Strong. Carburetor.
333,508. J an. 5, 1886. English. Carburetor.
347,663. Aug. 17, 1 6. Tibbets. Apparatus for carburetor gas.
409,570. Aug. 20, 1 9. Elder. Carburetor.
433,336. July 29, 1890. Fiesse. Apparatus for oxygenating and carbureting
air.
545,048. Aug. 27, 1895. Brunnar. Carburetor.
545,125. Aug. 27, 1895. Gri t. Vaporizer for gas motors.
614,400. Nov. 15, 1898. Lee et al. Composition, process of, and appar atus fol"
making gas.
670,433. Mar. 28, 1901. Powers. Carburetor.
671.375. Apr. 2, 1901. Gallaher. Carburetor.
677,767. July 2, 1901. Jeffery. Hydrocarbon spraying device for gasoline
engines.
682.905. Sept. 17, 1901. Bland. Vaporizer for explosive engines.
*6 3,110. Sept. 24, 1901. IPelbaum. Mixing and vaporizing device for explOSive engines.
693,462. Feb. 1 ,1902. Titus. Combined carburetor and gasoline r egulator.
727,635. May 12, 1903. J effery. Carburetor.
742,452. Oct. 27, 1003. De Laitte. Carburetor.
758,902. May 3, 1904. Dickinson. Vaporizer for explosive engines.
774,798. Nov. 15, 1904. Thomp on. Carburetol·.
*775,614. Nov. 22', 1904. Sy\'ain. Carburetor for explosive engines.
777,390. Dec. 13, 1904. O'Shea. Carburetor.
790,025. May 16, 1906. Bennett. Air carb uretor.
792,158. June 13, 1905. Olds. Vaporizing dey ice for explosh'e engines.
*837,984. Dec. 11, 1906. Yail. Vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
853,915. May 14, 1907. Bowles et al. Apparatu for extracting gas from gasoline.
*857,111. June 18, 1907. Rice. Vaporizer for gas engines.
872,505. Dec. 3, 1907. Gore. Carburetor.
*886,2 3. Apr. 2 , 1908. Wayrynen. Carburetor.
915,132. Mar. 16, 1909. War tler. Carburetor.
916,463, Mar. 30, 1909, Looby. Carburetor.
"'917,264. Apr. 6, 1909. De Thay. Carburetor.
951.923. Mar. 15, 1910. Van Buren. Carburetor.
957,731. :May 10, 1910. Brady. Carburetor.
961,423. June 14, 1910. Sturtevant. Carburetor.
975,03 .
TOV. 8, 1910. R ockman.
Carburetor.
979,907. Dec. 27, 1910. White. Carburetor.
1,108,081. Aug. 18, 1914. Oliver. Carbureting apparatus.
B
1,110,453. S pt. 15, 1914. 1\1ono mith. Carburetor.
1,136.997. Apr. 27, 1915. Bennett. Carburetor.
"'1,141,796. June 1, 19]5. Hertzo"'. Carbu retor.
1,146,441. July 13, 1915. Oliver. Carbureting apparatus.

121

AERONAUTICS.

*1,183,864. May 23, 1916. Gardner. Carburetor.
Re.2,893 (27,470). Mar. 10, 1868. Pease. Hydrocarbon vapor apparatus.
Re. 3,225 (46,302) . Dec. 8, 1868. Mix. I mproved apparatus for carbureting
air.
Re. 6,754 (91 1213). Nov. 23, 1875. Austin. I mprovement in automatic feed
and absorption carburetors.
Cross-reference patents, class 48, s1tbclass 168.

24,199
47,986
50,250
52,946
55,950
63,215
64,776
65.705
66,067
66,071
70,014
72,825

79,667
83,147
84,234
103,994
104,642
111,175
127,039
Re.5,465
149,111
153,538
Re.6,070
160,690

162.848
163,323
176,349
184,049
1 9,727
190,714
193,407
194,121
199,928
203,458
211,194
213,351

226,122
238,818
248,750
261.861
308,886
311,858
312,289
353,311
379,129
390,037
4. 7,225
2
500,712

587,867
620,496
620,586
622,00
672,51
701,890
706,600
7:.0,336
73 ,604
737,738
742,1)20
749,768

772,530
876,678
885,230
964,657
951,501
973,882
976,322
976,781
976,885
9 9,697
9 9,848
990,848

990,159
1,050,322
1,109,0'5
1,123,469
],125,368
1,157,363

SUBCLA S lCD, CABBURETORS, SURFACE, FLOAT.

28,549. June 5, 1860. Ashcroft. Apparatus for naphthalizing gases.
44,883. Nov. 1, 1864. Oc1iorne. Improved apparatu for carbureting a ir.
59,473. Nov. 6, 1866. Stevens. Improyed apparatus for carbureting air.
59,991.
ov. 27, 1866. F r ank. Improyed apparatus for carbureting air.
61,918. Feb. 12, 1867. Pierce. I moroved apparatu' for car bureting gas.
66,937. July 23, 1867. Pierce. Improved apparatus fot· carbureting gas.
69,483. Oct. 1, 1867. Richardson & Pond. Improyement ill generating gas
f rom hydrocarbon liquids.
•
71,665. Dec. 3, 1867. Thomp 'on & Hall. I mproved carbureting apparatus.
73,073. J an. 7, 1868. Bierce. Improved apparatus for carbureting.
83,239. Oct. 20, 1868. Bassett. Im proved apparatu for the manufacture of
illuminating gas.
84,332.
Jov. 24, 1868. W'ood. Improved apparatu for c:wbureting a ir.
87,192. Feb. 23, 1869. Paine. I mproved appa ratus for charging air with hydrocarbon vapors.
104,716. Ju ne 28, 1870. Dupas & Bar barin. Impro\'ement i n apparatus for
carbureting air.
105,190. July 12, 1870. Galagher. I mproyement in gas machine'.
113,147. Mar . 28, 1871. Dupa & Barbarin. Improvement in carbureting machines.
115,6 4. June 6, 1871. Bloomfielc1. Improvement in the manufacture of pneumatic ga .
118,302. Aug. 22, 1871. Tirrill. I mpr o,ement in apparatus fol' carbureting air
and gas.
131.210. Sept. 10, 1872. Butler. Improvement in carbureting attachments for
gas burners.
131.369. Sept. 17, 1872. Ofeld t. Improvement in carburetorR.
131.943. Oct. 8, 1872. Dayton. Improvement in carburetol'R fo r ai r and gas.
136.228. Feb. 28, 1873. E lsto n. Im provement in carbu retor .
141,968. Au"'. 19, 1873. Van Houten. I mprovement in apparatus for carbureting air.
143,523. Oct. 7, 1873. Mc lilian. I mpr ovement in carburetors.
144,858. Nov. 23, 1873. lUu gr a ye. Improyement in ca rbu r etor s.
146.313. Jan. 13, 1874. Carr. I mpt'oyement in carburetors.
147.256. Feb. 10, 1 74. Gray. Improvement in carburetors.
162,523. Apr. 27, 1875, Bickford. I mprovement in carburetors.
162,543. Apr. 27, 1 75. Foster . I mpro,ement in carbureting gas machines.
171,751. J an. 4, 1876. Wiggin. I mprovement in carburetors.
178.973. Jan. 20, 1876. Ste\yart. I mprovement in carburetor s.
182,345. Sept. 19. 1876. Bickford. Improvement in carOllretor s.
190,419. May 8, 1877. Clingman. I mprovement in float.· for cat'buretors.
196,304. Oct . 23, 1877. Meredith. Impr oyement in carburetors.

122

AERONAUTICS.

211,176. Jan. 7, 1879. Ofeldt. Improyement in carb uretors.
223,763. Jan. 20, 18 O. Sanders. Carbureting apparatu .
225,435. Mal'. 9, 1880. Strong. Apparatus for enriching and economizing coal
gas.
227,853. May 18, 1880. Soule. Carburetor.
230,656. Aug. 3, 1 80. Radkey. Carb uretor.
244,434. July 19, 1 1. Clingman. Carburetor.
251,673. Dec. 27, 18 1. Barry. Carburetor.
254,243. Feb. 28, 18 2. Small. Carburetor.
306,331. Oct. 7, 1884. Gardner et al. Gas machine.
306,4 5. Oct. 14, 1884. Hartfeldt. Gas ge nerator.
309,467. Dec. 16, 18 4. James. Apparatu for enriching coal gas.
355,594. Jan. 4, 1887. Daimler. Apparatu for impregnating air with hydrocarbon vapor.
362,197. . May 3, 1887. Bennett. Carbureting apparatus.
370,149. Sept. 20, 1 87. Leede. Carburetor.
371,034. Oct. 4, 1887. Collins. Carburetor.
423,257. Mar. 11, 1890. Huber. Carbur etor.
433,495. Aug. 5, 1890. Smith. Carbmetor.
475,972. May 31, 1892. Badlam. Carburetor.
528,377. Oct. 30, 1894. Moncur. Carburetor.
543,611. Jul y 30, 1895. Clingman. Carburetor.
546,815. Sept. 24, 1 95. Hain. Carburetor.
557,086. 1\1ar. 24, 1895. Schroeder. Gas enricher.
562,214. June 16, 1896. Burrows. Vapor-gas apparatus.
596,560. Jan. 4, 1898. Welch. Proce of and apparatus for generating gas.
608,531. Aug. 2, 1 98. Stephenson. Carburetor.
622,808. Apr. 11, 1899. Kemp. Carburetor.
629,581. July 25, 1 99. l\lartenette. Carburetor.
638,557. Dec. 5, 1899. Cary. Carburetor.
642,187. J an. 30, 1900. Welch. Carbureting apparatus.
643,397. Feb. 13, 1900. Broichgan. Carburetor.
649,435. May 15, 1900. Carter & Zierlein. Carburetor.
653,534. July 10, 1900. Shearer. Carbm·etor.
656,495. Aug. 21, 1900. Ander on. Carburetor.
659,438. Oct. 9, 1900. Egan. Carbmetor.
665,743. J an. 8, 1901. Kern. Carburetor.
669,157. Mar. 5, 1901. Ca rter & Zierlein. Carburetor.
708, 26. Sept. 9, 1902. Paul & Gundlack. Carburetor.
712,150. Oct. 2 ,1902. Parrett. Carburetor.
733,498. July 14, 1903. Maurer. Carburetor.
742,533. Oct. 27, 1903. Walthel·. Cat·buretor.
744, 77. Nov. 24, 1903. Parrott. Carburetor.
773,231. Oct. 25, 1904. Smith. Carburetor.
776,542. Dec. 6, 1904. Paul. Carburetor.
782,980. Feb. 21, 1905. Moehn. Carbureting apparatus.
816,267. Mar. 27, 1906. Steel. Ca rburetiug nppnratus.
819,074. May 1, 1906. Monroe. Gas-generating machine.
887,230. May 12, 1908. Rife. Carburetor.
951,590. Mar. 8, 1910. Bro,vn. Carburetor.
1,049,273. Dec. 31, 1912. Ruthven. Ca rburetor.
1,055,891. Mar. 11, 1913. Doudney. Carbur eting appal·atus.
1,064,102. June 10, 1913. Smith & Keivel·. Carburetor.
1,141,276. June 1, 1915. Smith. Carburetor.
1,155,184. Sept. 28, 1915. Winger. Carburetor.
Re.1,024 (28,549). Aug. 14, 1860. Ashcroft. Improvement in apparatus for
naphthallzing gases.
Re.2,253 (44,883). May 22, 1866. Odiorne. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
C1'088-1'e!erel1ce patent8, class 48, 8ub claS8 169.

149,060
267,933

317,197
317,686

661,660
797,615

886,403
940,916

947,639

950,825

1,113,892

123

AERONAUTICS.
SUBCLASS 219, PROCESSES, CARBURETING.

38,017. Mar. 24, 1863. Simonds & Warner. Improvement in treating gas for
illumination.
50,385. Oct. 10, 1865. Pond. I mprovement in the manufacture of illuminating gas.
50,491. Oct. 17, 1865. Pond. Improved apparatus for carbureting air.
55,359. June 5, 1866. Pond & Richardson. Improvement in generating and
supplying itluminating gas.
66,070. June 25, 1867. Bassett. I mprovement in the manufacture of illuminating gas.
67,790. Aug. 13, 1 67. Pedrick. Improved process for treating petroleum.
100.534. Mar. 8, 1870. Lawrence. Improvement in carbw-eting air.
107,268. Sept. 13, 1870. Kidder. Improvement in carbUl'eting apparatus.
110,427. Dec. 27, 1870. Boynton. Improvement in the methods of producing
illuminating gas.
228.357. June 1, 1880. Jackson. Process of carbureting gas and air.
377,735. Feb. 14, 1888. Bidelman. Proce of carbureting air.
420,797. Feb. 4, 1890. Holling worth. Proce s of vaporizing liquid hydro·
carbons and supplying the vapor to burners.
425,877. Apr. 15, 1890. Hanford. Process of carbureting air or gas.
467,266. Jan. 19, 1892. Stringfellow. Process of manufacturing gas.
483,489. Sept. 27, 1892. Bidelman. Manufacture of gas.
487,617. Dec. 6, 18D2. Griffes & Clarke. Process of carbureting air.
499,483. June 13, 1893. Tntham. Method of making gas.
579,415. Mar. 23, 1897. Van Norman. Manufacture of carbureted-air gas.
584,349. June 15, 1897. Griffen. Process of carbureting gas.
645,425. Mar. 13, 1900. McAllister. Process of carbureting.
656,484. Aug. 21, 1900. Shearer. Process of carbureting air or gas.
678,973. July 23, 1901. North. Process of making carbmeted air.
721,957. Mar. 3, 1903. Kuenzel. Process of pl'oducing combustible fluid.
749,767. Jan. 19, 1904. Wilson. Process of producing carbureted air.
855,094. May 28, 1907. Busenbenz. Gas-manufacture process.
865,624. Sept. 10, 1907. Ziegler. Process for the manufacture of illuminating
and heating gas.
885,095. Apr. 21, 1908. Solomon. Method of producino- gas from alcohol.
978,853. Dec. 20, 1910. Cutter. Method of and apparatus for making gas.
1,019,430. Mar . 5, 1912. Dawson. Method of carbureting air.
1,042,567. Oct. 29, 1912. Kuenzel. Process for producing combustible gas.
1,183,939. May 23, 1916. Whittelsey. Vaporizing process.
C1'08s-reference pCbtents, class 48, 81£bclaS8 219.

2,357
66,069
69,483
72,118

94,360
110,946
114,744
117,998

119,663
163,323
169,423
206,196

268,878
349,211
356,477

LIST

464,779
511,950
527,789

590,893
596,560
607,417

614,400
1,109,777
1,150,782

No. 2 .

C Ro ss-REFERENCE PATENTS FB01>{ LIST No. 1 , WITH PATENTS BELONGING IN, OR
REGULARLY ASSIGNED TO, THE SURCLASSES OF LIST No. 1 OMITTED.

8,433. Oct. 14, 1851. Warner. Lamp for burning vapor of benzol, etc.
9,967. Aug. 30, 1853. Drake. Benzol vapor apparatus.
31,720. Mar. 19, 1861. Kendall. Apparatus for naphthaUzing gas.
32,222. Apr. 30, 1861. Gwynne. Apparatus for naphthalizing gas.
35,984. J uly 29, 1862. Bassett. I mprovement in apparatus for carbureting gas.
46,770. Mar. 14, 1865. Bassett. Impr ovement of burners for carbUl'eted air.
47,986. May 30, 1865. Salisbury. I mpr oved apparatus for the manufacture
of gas.
56,116. J uly 3, 1866. Stevens. I mprovement in treating gas for illumination
and other purposes.
62,856. Mar . 12. 1867. Kidd. Carburetor.

124

ABRON AUTICS.

70,014. Oct. 22, 1867. Pease. I mproved carburetor tor locomotive headlights.
72,118. Dec. 10, 1867. Terry. Improl'ement in man ufacturing illuminating
gas.

73,900. Jan. 28, 1868. Jenkins. Improved carbureted-a ir lamp.
76,535. Apr. 7, 1868. Sloan. Impr oved apparatus fo r generating gas.
84,234. Nov. 17, 1868. Vel' tr aet. I mprovement in hyclrocarbon burner .
89,536. Apr. 27, 1 69. W ood . I mprovement in lamps.
90,436. May 25, 1869. Dunelerdale. Im provement in carburetors.
107,743. Sept. 27, 1870. Whitney. I mpr ovement in g-as-carbonizing attachments for lights . .
110,005. Dec. 13, 1870. Brown. Improvement in gaslights.
114,358. May 2, 1 71. Simonds. Improvement in ga machine'.
J14,744. May 16, 1871. Ambuhl. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
hydrogen gas.
115,988. June 13, 1871. Sloper. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air.
119,663. Oct. 3, 1871. SprillO'er. Improvement in gas machines.
128,321. June 25, 1872. Myel'. I mprovement in apparatus for the manufacture
of illuminating gas.
130,164. Aug. 6, 1872. Symes. I mpr ovement in apparatus for the manufacture
of gas.
132,132. Oct. 15, 1872. Ball. I mprovement in carbureting gas lamps.
133,118. Nov. 19, 1872. Post. I mprovement in carbureting lamps.
138,160. Apr. 22, 1873. Irl and. I mprovement in ga generators.
138,715. May 6, 1873. Tilelen. Improvement in gas machine.
143,534. Oct, 7, 1873. Shaler. I mprovement in carburetors.
149,060. Mar. 31, 1874. Ramsdell. Improvement in the manufacture of
wood gas.
151,557. June 2, 1874~ Bingham. Improvement in the manufacture of hydrogen gas.
153,952. Aug. 11, 1874. Hawes. Improvement in gas-carbu reting machines.
156,172. Oct. 20, 1874. Olney. I mprovement in processes and appar atus for
the manufacture of illuminating gas.
163,323. May 18, 1875. Martin. I mprovement ill the manufacture of gas.
163,535. May 18, 1875. Sllaler. I mp rovement in carburetors.
167,150. Aug. 31, 1875. Ban. Vapor burner.
168,910. Oct. 19, 1875. Marks. I mprovement in carburetor s.
177,191. May 9, 1875. B all. Im provement in lamps.
189,727. Apr. 17, 1877. Greenough. Apparatus for pr oducing illuminating gas.
190,673. May 15, 1877. Dopp. Improvement in hydroca rbon liquid attachments
for gas burners.
191,381. May 29, 1877. Spengler. l mprovement in oil-gas burners.
192,825. J.uly 10, 1877. Hangliter. Improvement in apparatus for carbureting
air.
194,121. Aug. 14, 1877. Austin. Improvement in lamps for burning naphtha
gas.
197,944. Dec. 11, 1877. Palmer. Improvement in carbureting lamps.
206,999. Aug. 13, 1878. Ball. Improvement in carbureting lamps.
210,717. Dec. 10, 1878. Sloane. I mpr ovement in carburetors fo r cars.
213,351. Mar. 18, 1879. Roth. I mprovement in carburetors.
225,778. Mar. 23, 1880. Wittig & B ees. Gas engine.
228,547. J une 8, 18 O. Maxim. Gas apparatus.
238,757. Mar. 15, 1881. Bt·ainard. Carburetor.
240,994. May 3, 1881. Gaume. Gas engine.
242,379. May 31, 1 81. Dhaler. Carburetor.
249,160. Nov. 8, 18 1. Cr ocker. Cooking apparatus.
252,307. J an. 17, 1882. Fagan. Device for burning air and hydrocarbon
vapors.
261,861. Aug. 1, 1882. Litchfield & H enshaw. Burning and carbureting air.
267,933. Nov. 21. 1882. Ramsdell. Apparatus for manufacturing wood gas.
275,238. Apr. 3, 18 3. Marcus. Vaporizer.
278,281. May 2 , 18 3. Shaler. Carburetor.
284,373. Sept. 4, 1883. Brough. Carburf'tor.
286,030. Oct. 2, 1 83. Marcus. Gas engine.
302,045. July 15, 1884. Spiel. Gas engine.

AERONAUTICS.

125

Dec. 2, 1884. Paqueliu et al. Veterinary cauterizer.
Dec. 30, ]8 4. mteve &. De Braam. Carbureted-air engine.
Feb. 17, 1885. Roy . Cauterizing apparatus.
May 5, 1885. Ram ·(lell. Apparatus for manufacturing gas from wood.
Feb. 23, 1886. Leedf? Automatic carbureting Jamp.
Feb. 23, 1886. Leede. Automatic carbureting lump.
Sept. H, 1886. Cottrell. Method of and apparatus for carbureting
and mixing ga .
350,200. Oct. 5, 1886. Humee. Hydrocarbon vapor engine.
350,382. Oct. 5, 1886. Merritt. Carburetor.
*3:-0,769. Oct. 12, 18 6. Ragot & Smyers. Petroleum and gas motor.
356,476. Jan. 25, 1887. Johnston. Proce s of and apparatus for manufacturing
illuminating gas.
360,944. Apr. 12, 1887. Averell. Process of and apparatus for generating
illuminating gas.
370.258. Sept. 30, 1 87. Holt & Crossley. Gas motor engine.
376,638. Jan. 17, 18, . Daimler. En;;ine-driyen vehicle.
378,647. Feb. 28, 1888. BeDl1ett. Carbureting lamp.
379,129. lUar. 6, 1888. Sanders. Car motor.
385,121. June 26, 18 6. King & Brown. Carburetor.
386,029. July 10, 1888. 1:'l'iestman. Motor engine operated by the combustion
of liquid hydrocarbon.
403,367. lUay 14, 1889. Parker. Gas or gasoline engine.
421,474. Feb. 15, 1800. Beckfield & Schmid. Gas engine.
423,367. 1\1ar. 1], ] , 90. Young. Carl)\\reting ,;tref?t lamp.
423.393. 1\1ar. 11, 1 90. Ro~·. Cauterizing apparatus.
424,654. Apr. 1, 1890. 1\1cClelland et a!. Vapor sto,e.
429,426. June 3, 1890. Da,,"son. Carbureting apparatus.
433. 56. Sept. 2, 1 90. Parker. Carburetor.
*439,813. Kov. 4, 1890. Die(1erichs. "fapor engiue.
451,036. Apr. 28, 1 91. Frost. Carburetor and attachment for lamps connected
therewi th.
*477,295. June 21, 1892. Charter. Gas engine.
488,454. Dec. 20, 1892. Ro? Tbermocauter.
4 9,762. Jan. 10, 1893. Ruthven. Ga. cooking apparatu
490,415. J an. 2,1, 1803. Reid et a1. Lamp.
497.0,18. Jnly 16, 1888. Durand. Carbureted-air engine.
500,477. June 27, 1893. Drysdale. Valve for hydro arbon engines.
*504,723. Sept. 12, 1893. Gray. Hydrocarbon engine.
505,767. Sept. ~o, 1893. Irgene. Gas or petroleum engine.
507,989. Nov. 7, 1893. 13rUnler. Petrolenm motor.
512.270. J an. 9, 18lH. Blakeley. Apparatus for manufacturing gas,
515,440. Feb. 27, 1894. 1\1cGarrier. Carburetor.
538,791. May 7, 1 95. R eichardt. Carburetor for thermocauters.
541,441. Jnne 16, 1895. Lee. Thermoc!luter.
"'5-42,043. July 2, 1 95. Charter. Go,ernor for gas engines.
542,410. July 9, 1895. Griffin. Liquid-hydrocarbon motor.
548,689. Oct. 29, 1895. Wirsching. Therm ocauter.
"549,939. Nov. 19, 1895. Seck. lUarine hydrocarbon motor.
*550.675. Dec. 3, 1895. Col borne. Gas or vapor engine.
552,312. D ec. 31, 1895. Battey. Motor for bicycles.
552,718. Jan. 7, 1896. Priestman. Hydrocarbon engine.
054,207. Feb. 4, 1896. Woodarc1. Vapor stove.
554.699. Feb. 18, 1896. Johnson. Gas generator or Yaporizer.
*555,717. !\lar. 3, 1896. Weinman et al. Gas engine.
555.373. F eb. 25, 1 96. H enr oid-Schweizer. Petroleum motor.
*5:-7,496. !\lar. 31, 1896. Duryea. Engine or motor.
562,307. June 16, 1896. Lamos. Gas engine.
*563,541. July 7, 1896. Allman. Vaporizer for oil engines.
563.548. July 7, 1 96. Bodell. Gas or oil engine.
56,1,155. July 14, 1 96. Millet. Velocipede.
564,769. July 29, 1896. Swain. Gas or oil engine.
568,017. Sept. 22, 1896. Cundall. Oil and "as motor engine.
574,614. Jan. 5, 1897. Lamos. Ga -engine attachment.
575,720. Jan. 26, 1897. Ledent. Gas engine.
582,073. May 4, 1897. lUead. Gas or oil engine.
308,693.
309,835.
312,512.
317,197.
336,572.
336,574.
349,211.

126

AERONAUTICS.

583.982. June 8, 1897. Davis. Gasoline and gas engine.
*585,115. June 22, 1 97. Miller. Gas engine.
*587,627. Aug. 3, 1 97. Williams. Gas engine.
592,794. Nov. 2, 1 97. Lanchester. Gas or Oil motor engine.
593,034. Nov. 2, 1897. Spacke. Gas engine.
596,536. Jan. 4, 1898. Park. Combined gasoline blowpipe and burner.
602,820. Apr. 23, 1898. Beck. Gas engine.
*605.815. Jnne 14, 1898. Duryea. Gas engine.
609,031. Aug. 30, 1898. Parker. Carburetor.
612,258. Oct. 11, 1898. Mead. Gas or oil engine.
*613,757.
Jov. 8, 1898. Carnell. Gas engine.
617,530. Jan. 10, 1899. Howard. Direct conversion of ener gy of fuel Ilnd an
expansion medium into power.
620,496. Feb. 2 , 1899. Raven~z. Carburetor.
'622.891. Apr. 11, 1 99. Graef. Gas engine.
623,190. Apr. 1 , 1899. Stoddard. Explosive engine.
623.361. Apr. 18. 1 99. Frew. OSCillating gas or steam engine.
*625.887. May 30, 1899. Lair. Engine.
627,359. June 20. 1899. Steele. Automobile vehicle.
"627,857. June 27, 1899. Knox. Gas engine.
628,222. July 4, 1899. Hewitt. Vapor blowpipe.
*632,859. Sept. 12, 1899. Walrath. Explosive engine.
632.8 8. Sept. 12, 1 99. Ayres. Gas engine.
633.014. Sept. 12. 1 99. Law on. Motor vehicle.
635,456. Oct. 24, 1899. Wood & Eddy. Ga oline lamp.
637.299. No,. 21, 1899. Strong. Oil-vaporizing device for gas engines.
*645,044. Mar. 6, 1900. Otto. ' Gas engine.
"657,140. Sept. 4, 1900. Starr & Cogswell. Explosive gas engine.
659,911. Oct. 16, 1900. Barnard. Gas engine.
"660,482. Oct. 23, 1900. Bates. Rota n ' explo ive engine.
662,922. Dec. 4, 1900. Dudley. Branding iron.
*664,200. Dec. 18, 1900. White. Gasoline engine.
66 .952. Feb. 26, 1901. Carson. Desulphurizing coppe matte.
672,500. Apr. 23, 1901. Van Duzen. Vaporizing device for crude-oil explosive
engine.
673.13. Apr. 30. 1901. Miller. Governing device for explosive engines.
*677,283. June 25, 1901. Secor. Oil-feed device for explosive motors.
679.018. July 23, 1901. Fischer. Oil feed for carburetor.
679.389. July 30, 1901. McCall. Governor for explosive engines.
*686,092. Nov. 5, 1901. Lear. Vaporizer for gasoline engine.
"'686,101. Nov. 5, 1901. Maybach. Regulation device for explosion motors.
690,486. Jan. 7, 1902. Tomlinson. Apparatus for the vaporization, combustion,
and utilization of hydrocarbon oils.
*690,010. Jan . .7, 1902. Richardson. Hydrocarbon engine.
692,071. J an. 28, 1902. Pugh. Explosive engine.
692. 00. Feb. 11, 1902. Kemp. Carbu retor.
"'696,146. Mar. 25, 1902. Riotte. Mixing or spr aying device.
698,895. Apr. 29, 1902. Beck. Continuou '-combustion turbine.
"703,769. July 1, 1902. De Long. Iotor vellicle.
706,482. Aug. 5, 1902. Wirsching. Thermocauter.
*706.494. Aug. 5, 1902. Minogue. Motive-power engine.
"'710,841. Oct. 7, 1902. Brush. Mixing valve for gas or gasoline engines.
"'726,986. May 5, 1903. Peteler. Carburetor for ga engines.
*730,084. June 2, 1903. Boulfuss. Gas or vapor engine.
733,444. July 14, 1903. iVa hburne. Carburetor.
734.772. July 28, 1903. Strowger. Carbureting lamp.
737,738. Sept. 1, 1903. Hitchcock. Vapor generator.
*740,571. Oct. 6, 1003. J oranson. Gas en"'ine.
745,055. Nov. 24, 1903. Harris. Explosive engine.
745,578. Dec. 1, 1903. Dean. Apparatus for supplying explosive engines with
explosive mixture.
747,190. Dec. 15, 1903. Krau s. Motor wheel for bicycles or other vehicles.
*747,264. Dec. 15, 1903. Sturtevant. Carburetor for explosion engines.
750,764. .Tan. 26, 1904. Harmany. Carburetor.
753,510. Mar. 1, 1904. Murdock. Gas engine.
758,790. May 3, 1904. Snell. Carburetor.

AERONAUTICS.

127

760,247. May 17. 1904. Ranney. Carburetor.
767,732. Aug. 16, 1904. Bromley. Centralizing operating mechanism for
valves.
768.063. Aug. 23, 1904. Maton. Carbureting lamp.
*772,530. Oct. 18, 1904. McGee. Carburetor for gasoline engines.
773,543. Nov. 1, 1904. Chace. Oil burner.
788,427. Apr. 25, 1905. R eichenbach. Self-carbureting lamp.
790,325. May 23, 1905. Stelle. Explosive engine.
*791. 501. June 6, 1905. Ri cha rd. Gas or explosion engine.
*796,712. Au g. 8, 1905. Fergusson & Sheppy. Carburetor for hydrocarbon
engines.
800,996. Oct. 3, 1905. Drummond. In ternal-combustion en "'ines.
801,390. Oct. 10, 1905. Low. Hydrocarbon motor.
*806.125. Dec. 5, 1905. Farwell. Rotary explosive engine.
806,460. Dec. 5, 190-. Bucklin. Spraying device.
807.131. Dec. 12, 1905. Sa le. Carburetor.
807.391. Dec. 12, 1905. Low. H ydrocarbon motor.
807, 35. Dec. 19, 1905. Lyon. Crud e-oil engine.
* 10,435. J an . 23, 1906. Reynolds. Rotary explosive engine.
812,860. F eb. 20, 1906. Low. Hydrocarbon motor.
8]3,796. Feb. 27, 1906. H olgalc. Carburetor .
816,549. Mar. 27, 1906. Heckert. Ga engine.
*822,172. May 29, 1906. Welcome. In terua l-combustion engine.
*823,742. June 19, 1906. Schmidt. Carburetor-control mechanism for mot9r
,ehicles.
830,744. Sept. 4, 1906. F ran tz. Explosive engine.
*832,532. Oct. 2, 1906. Carlson & Shimpf. Ca rburetor.
"'846,471. Mar. ] 2, 1907. Hobart. F eed governor fo r oil engines.
846,679. Mar. 12, 1907. Ma on & Sinclair. Cat·buretor .
., 49,538. Apr. 9, 1907. Gaeth. Carburetor.
852,272. Apr. 30, 1907. Hennig. Governing means fot· internal-combustion
engine .
*855,582. June 4, 1907. Miller. Speed-contr olling mechanism for explosive
motors.
"862.574. July 2, 1907. Dalkranian. Carburetor.
867,605. Oct. 8, 1907. Rothe. F uel-val\'e controller for hydrocarbon engines.
867,797. Oct. 6, 1907. Coleman. Engine starter.
86 ,281. Oct. 15, 1907. Low. Hydrocarbon motor.
':'872,336. Dec. 3, 1907. Gibbs. In ternal-combustion engine.
872,419. Dec. 3, 1907. Herbst. Charge-form ing device for internal-combustion
engine .
878,706. Feb. 11, 1908. Anderson. Carburetor.
883,240. Mar. 31, 1908. SabatM. I nternal-combustion engine.
891,322. June 23, 1908. Brennan. Carburetor for explosive engines.
892,726. July 7, 1908. Holgate. Carburetor.
'894,656. July 28, 1908. J ohnston. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
895,222. Aug. 4, 1908. Winton & Anderson. lIIultiple-cylinder two-cycle explosion engine.
904,455.
ov. 17, 1908. De Roos. Vaporizing device fo r internal-combustion
engine.
*904,508. Nov. 24, 1908. Carlin. Carbur etor.
*904,855. Nov. 24, 1908. Enrico. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
906,783. Dec. 15, 1908. Du Brie. Apparatus for supplying fuel to gas engines.
*908,112. Dec. 29, 1908. Lon"'Decker. Internal-combustion engi ne.
909,558. J an. 12, 1909. Daellenbach. In tern al-combustion engine.
913,121. Feb. 23, 1909. Frayer. Valve control.
021,934. May 18, 1909. Willard. Apparatus for producing gas from liquid
hydroca rbons.
*922,145. May 18, 1909. Howar th . Carburetor.
"922,383. May 18, 1909. Brons. H ydrocarbon engine.
926,756. July 6, 1909. Low. Means for Supplying air to hydrocarbon motors.
"928,939. July 27, 1909. Charter. Char ge-form ing device for gas engines.
*930,483. Aug. 10, 1909. Kershaw. Carburetor and like device for mixing
gas or vapor and air.
*931,389. Aug. 17, 1909. Crook. I nternal-combustion engine.
942,863. Dec. 7, 1909. McIntire. Apparatus fo t· treating gas.

.------ - - - - --

------- - -------------------------

- --

1~8

AERONAUTICS.

Jan. 18, 1910. Riotte. Pressure-regulated gas ,alve for engines.
Feb. 8, 1910. Shearer. Carburetor.
!lIay 24, 1910. Ottaway. Carburetor.
June 14, 1910. Morse. Internal-combu tion engine.
Au"". 9, 1910. McCarty. Device fOI' alternating atomizer pressures.
Oct. 18, 1910. Torchebeuf & Lanneau.
arbureting lamp.
Oct. 25, 1910. Williams. Carburetor.
Nov. 15, 1910. Koontz. Carburetor.
~975,796 . Nov. 15, 1910. Radcliffe. Internal-combul'tion enooine.
"976,237. Nov. 22, 1910. Westmacott. Carburetor and Yllporizer for internalcombu tion engine .
976,885. Nov. 29, 1910. Kemp. Carburetin'" apparatus.
*977,813. Dec. 6, 1910. Mander. Carburetor.
979,667. Dec. 27, 1916. Harp tel'. Vaporizer for internal-combu tion en"'ine .
979,787. Dec. 27, 1910. No~·e . l\Iixer for ga e and liquids.
*979,908. Dec. 27, 1910. Willet. Carburetor.
980,946. Jan. 10, 1911. Heermans. Internal-combu tion engine.
982, 25. Jan. 31, 1911. Johnston. Mixing Ynll"e for hydrocarbon engine .
*983,307. Feb. 7, 1911. Perkins. Internal-combustion engine.
994,985. June 13, 1911. Deprez & Richir. Cnri)uretor.
1,004,661. Oct. 3, 1911. Kn app. Purifying apparatus for acetylene gas.
*1,013,955. Jan. 9, 1912. Roberts. Carburetor.
*1,017,750. Feb. 20, 1912. Hanchett. Mixer for gaseous fuel.
1,023,402. Apr. 16, 1912. Whiting. Mixer for ga eous fue l.
1,025, 14. !lIay 7, 1912. Lemp. Fuel-. upply y ·tem for explo h-e en""ines.
1,030,388. June 25, 1912. Cross. Motiye-tluid mixer for internal-combu tion
en""ines.
1,036,812. Aug. 27, 1912. Edmonson. Separator and volatilizeI'.
1,038.300. Sept. 10, 1912. Crone. Combined Yuporiz l' anel priming pump.
1,054,205. Feb. 25, 1913. Illmer & Kunze. Internal-combustion engine.
1,056,760. !lIar. 18, 1913. Watt. Gas mixer and heater for e~-plo. jye enaines.
*1,060,053. Apr. 29, 1913. Winkler. Carburetor.
1,064,106. June 10, 1913. Stewart. Auxiliary air supply means for internalcombu. tion engines.
1,066,391. July 1, 1913. Von Eicken. Proelucer of inert ga es.
*1,069,502. Aug. 5, 1913. Waelsworth. Priming del"ice for internal-combustion
engine.
1,070.449. Aug. 19, 1913. Green et al. Air-aelmi sion r egulator.
1,077,414. Nov. 4, 1913. 1\lar h. Cooling el yice for an engine.
*1,079,338. Nov. 25, 1913. Hazelton. Gn 'eou -fuel mixer.
1,0 2,007. Dec. 23, 1913. Brush. Ga -mixture proelucer.
1,0 3,111. Dec. 30, 1913. 1\IacConaghy. Explosion motor.
*1,084,02 . Jan. 13, 1914. Pierce. Carburetor.
1,096,585. lay 12, 1914. Yost & Jahnke. DiYieleel-spray injection engine.
1,099,445. June 9, 1914. Jaubert.
lethod of running internal-combustion
engine.
*1,099,995. June 16, 1914. Page & Selelon. Carburetor.
1,101.271. June 23, 1914. Gentzen. 1\[ethoel of introelucing fuel into internalcombustion engines.
1,106,935. Aug. 11, 1914. Freer. Vaporizer and carburetor.
*1,109,192. Sept. 1, 1914. Wright. Internal-combustion engine.
1,111,620. Sept. 22, 1914. Sheeely. Auxiliary air inlet ancI primer for internalcombu tion engine .
*1,111,897.
ept. 29, 1914. Harrold. 1\1ixing vah-e for explo ive engines.
*1,116,192. Nov. 3, 1914. Winton . VaporizinO" cIeyice.
1,117,354. Nov. 17, 1914. Erickson. GasifrinO" device for liquid fuel.
*1,117,641. Nov. 17, 1914. Cottle. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,117,642. Nov. 17, 1914. Cottle. In ternal-combu. tion engine.
1,120,82. Dec. 15, 1914. Lowry. Fuel- upply system and starter for explosion
engines.
1,124,706. Jan. 12, 1915. Conwell & Littl e. Heater for aa eou fuel.
*1,125,525. Jan. 19, 1915. Hathcock.
arburetor.
*1,131,157. 1\1ar. 9, 1915. Percival & Patterson. Kero ene-gas generator.
*1,131,371. 1\1ar. 9, 1915. HatfielcI. Fuel-mixing elevice for internal-combustion engines.
1,132,420. Mar. 16, 1915. Andereau. Heater fo r gaseous fluids.
946.'737.
9J .744.
'939,066.
*961,152.
966,5 1.
973,240.
*973,602.
"975,696.

AERONAUTICS.

129

*1,136,368. Apr. 20, 1915. Riker. Regulating means for internal·combustion
engines.
1,142,440. June 8, 1915. Kramer. Fuel pulverizer for internal-combustion
engines.
*1,143,092. Junp 15, 1915. Unckles. Carburetor.
1,143,258. June 15, 1915. Dunham. Inspirator for internal-combustion engines.
*1,143,779. June 22, 191(i. Pembroke. Carburetor.
*1,151,989. Aug. 31, 1915. Bala sa. Carburetor.
1,158,179. Oct. 26, 1915. Clerk. Internal-combustion engine working with
coke-oven and other gases.
*1,158,435.
ov. 2, 1915. Bourne. Carburetor.
*1,160,837. JOY. 16, 1915. Burnham. Carburetor.
1,160,897. Nov. 16, 1915. Holloway. Means for treating kerosene or the like
for use in hydroca rbon en<Yines.
1,161,095.
ov. 23, 1915. WestinghQuse. Internal-combustion engine.
1,165,656. Dec. 28, 1915. Entz. Carburetor heater.
1,165,914. Dec. 28, 1915. Shaw. Fire-prevention means for internal-combustion
engines.
*1,167,217. Jan. 4, 1916. Reichenbach. Carburetor.
*1,176,267. Mar. 21, 1916. Baverey. Carburetor.
Re.4,476 (115,988) . July 18, 1871. Sloper. Improvement in apparatus for
carbureting air.
Re.12,332. Mar. 28, 1905. Jacob.

LIST NO.3.
SELECTED PATENTS FlWU SEARCHED SUBCLASSES ABRANGED ACCORDING TO CLASS
A D
UBCLASS, WITH PATENTS WHICH APPEAR IN THE PREVIOUS LISTS
OMITTED.

CLASS 123, INTERNAL-COMBUSTION ENGINES.
SUBCLASS 8, GENERATING PLANTS.

326,430. Sept. 15, 1885. James. Apparatus for manufacture, using and furnishing motive power by aid of air and llydrocarbon oils.
649,713. May 15, 1900. Woodward & Barckdall. Explosive engine.
SUBCLASS 4, JNTERNAL COMBUSTION AND FLUro PRESSUBE.

620,431.
625,416.
647,583.
651,780.
729,652.
790,344.
832,592.

Feb. 28, 1899. Eisenhuth. Explosive engine for vehicles.
May 23, 1899. R evel. Carbureted air or other fluid pressure engine.
Apr. 17, 1900. Scott. ExplOSion engine.
June 12, 1900. Dawson. Interal-combustion motor.
June 2, 1903. Osborne. Motor.
May 23, 1905. Clark. Valve-gear mechanism.
Oct. 9, 1906. Bush. Motor.
SUBCLASS 7, HAMMERS .

*1,033,503. July 23, 1912. White & Duryea. Internal-combustion power
hammer.
*1,033,505. July 23, 1912. White & Duryea. Power device.
SUBCLASS 8, ROTARY.

795,889. Aug. 1, 1905. Billinghurst. Internal-combustion turbine.
1,006,417. Oct. 17, 1911. Sullivan. Rotary compound explosive engine.
SUBCLASS 9, ROTARY IUPACT.

853,124. May 7, 1907. Schann. Turbine.
877,194. Jan. 21, 1908. Holzwarth. Gas turbine.
1,063,686. June 3, 1913. Duryea & White. Internal-combustion tool.
1,187,293. June 13, 1916. Faurot. Turbine.
72805°- S. Doc. 559, 64-2--·$l

-

130

-

-

-

--~-~~-

AERONAUTICS.
SUBCLASS 10, ROTARY REACTION.

364,866. June 14, 1887.

Seigneuret.

Reaction wheel.

SUBCLASS 13, ROTARY ROTATING ABUTMENT.

868,678. Oct. 22, 1907. MacKasie. Rotary engi ne.
883,363. Mar. 31, 1908. Walker. Rotary explosive engine.
1,177,380. Mar. 28, 1916. Carpenter. Rotary e~:plosive engine.
SUBCLASS 15, ROTARY, SWI:'\'GING A HUTMENT.

833,107.
930,601.

Oct. 9, 1906. AkerLJerg. Hotary engine.
Aug. 10, 1909. Ka parek. Rotary internal-combu tion motor.
SUBCLASS 16, ROTARY, SLIDIKG PISTO

•

July 14, 1882. Wigmore. Gas motor engine.
Sept. 16, 1902. McCahon. Combination ai l' and vapor motor.

260,513.
709,030.

SUBCLASS 18, OSCILLATINO PISTON .

1,080,272.

Dec. 2, 1913.

Fletcher. Engine.

SUBCLASS 20, STEAM CO YERTIDLE.

1,162,423. Nov. 30, 1915. Wentworth.
SUBCLASS 22, INTER 'AL

Interllal-combustion engine.
co~rBUSTION

AN D AIR.

30,701. Nov. 20, 1860. Wilcox. Air engine.
Re. 1,942. Apr. 25, 1865. Wilcox. Improvement in hot-air engine.
SUBCLASS 25, WATER AND HYDRO CARBO " .

49,346. Aug. 8, 1865. Hugon. Improvement in gas e ngines.
591,346. Oct. 19, 1897. Mayhew. Gas engine.
597,860. Jan. 25, 1898. Rolfe. Explosion engine.
*819,239. May 1, 1906. Marks. Mixing and combin ing dev ice for gas engines.
861,411. Jul y 30, 1907. Wei ·S. Internal-combustion engine.
"917,283. Apr. 6, 1909. Frost. Internal-combustion engine.
1,008,825. Nov. 14, 1911. Holroyd. Apparatus for genera ting products of
combustion.
*1,077,881. Nov. 4, 1913. Higgins. Process of mixing f uel fo r carburetors.
*1,148,166. July 17, 1915. Harrington. Explosion engine and method of operating the same.
SUBCLASS 28, OIL ENOINE, PUMP SUPPLY TO AIR INLET, FOUR-CYCLE.

349,369.
349,464.
393,127.
426,337.
502,255.
527,635.
*532,314.
543,818.
570,500.
574,610.
584,960.
584,961.
597,326.
607,878.
612,756.
624,975.
626,275.
665,714.

Sept. 21, 1886. Spiel. Petroleum and gas engine.
Sept. 21, 1886. Spiel. Gas engine.
Nov. 20, 1888. Spiel. Petroleum engine.
Apr. 22,1890. Sintz. Gas engine.
July 25, 1893. Hoyt. Gas engine.
Oct. 16, 1894. Voll. Gas engine.
Jan. 8, 1895. Chal·ter. Gas engine.
July 30, 1 95. Weeks. Gas enO'ine.
Nov. 3. 1 96. Prouty. Ga oline and vapor engine.
Jan. 5, 1 97. JOl'Rnson. Gas engine.
June 22, 1897. Quast. Explosive engine.
June 22, 1897. Qua t. Gas engine.
Jan. 11, 1898. Quast. Gas engine.
July 26, 1 98. Quast. Gas engine.
Oct. 18, 1 9. Osten berg. Gas engine.
May 16, 1899. Qua t. Gas engine.
June 6, 1899. Froelich. Speed regulator for explosive engines.
Jan. 8, 1901. Z;immerman. Speed r egulator for explosive engines.

ARRON AUTICS.

672,615. Apr. 23, 1901.
694,948. Mar. 11, 1902.
718,511. Jan . 13, 1903.
858,022. June 25, 1907.
motors.

131

Doorenbos. Gas or gasoline engine.
Davis. Explosive engine.
Ostenberg. Explosion engine.
Podlesak. Fuel feeding device for internal-combustion

SUBCLASS 34, OIL ENGINES, EXTERNAL VAPORIZING.

289,691. Dec. 4, 1883. Nash. Gas engine.
289,692. Dec. 4, 1883. Nash. Gas engine.
295,784. Mar. 25, 1884. Maxim. Gas engine.
33],079. Nov. 24, 1885. Nash. Explosive-vapor engine.
331,210. Nov. 24, 1885. Nash. Explosive-vapor engine.
334,041. Jan. 12, 18 6.
ash. Method of operating explosive-vapor engines_
376,212. Jan. 10, 1888. Shanck. Gas engine.
378,328. Feb. 21, 1888. List & Kosakoff. Petroleum motor.
425,116. Apr. 8, 1890. Valentine & Grigg. Gas engine.
544,586. Aug. 13, 1895. Mead. Gas or oil engine.
583,399. May 25, 1897. Lewis. Gas or vapor engine.
*598,986. l<
'eb. 15, 1898. Gere. Combustible-vapor engine.
615,766. Dec. 13, 1898. Vansickle. Gas engine.
648,914. May 8, 1900. Bertheau. Vaporizer for petroleum motors.
649,122. May 8, 1900. Allen. Rotary engine.
6 3,080. Sept. 24, 1901. Stewart. Gas engine.
701.140. May 27, 1902. Briggs. Hydrocarbon-oil engine.
736.807. Aug. 18, 1903. Wilkinson. Internal-combustion engine.
756,834. Apr. 12, 1904. Denison. Vaporizer for explosive engines.
770,872. Sept. 27, 1904. Sohnlein. Explosive engine.
805,774. Nov. 28, 1905. Blaisdell. Internal-combu tion engine.
873.840. Dec. 17, 1907. Clift. Internal-combustion enl7ine.
881.189. Mar. 10, 1908. Losch & Gerber. Explo ive engine.
894,568. July 28. 1908. Avery. Gas engine.
899,186. Sept. 22, 1908. Rabsilber. Internal-combustion engine.
909,897. Jan. 19, 1909. Hertzberg. External electrical vaporizer for combustion engines.
909,900. Jan. 19, 1909. Hertzberg et al. Electrically heated star ting vaporizer
for internal-combustion engines.
961,581. June 14, 1910. Bowen. Explosive engine.
971.682. Oct. 4, 1910. Low. Economizer.
974,087. Oct. 25, 1910. Low. Charge-forming arrangement for use in internalcombustion engines and turbines.
975,008. Nov. 8, 1910. White. Method of operating gas engines and apparatus
therefor.
977.847. Dec. 6, 1910. Wright. Internal-combustion engine.
1,003,795. Sept. 19, 1911. Rabsilber. Internal-combustion engine.
1,006,244. Oct. 17, 1911. Low & Hertzberg. Explosi\'e engine.
1,026,871. May 21, 1912. Lake. Internal-combustion engine.
*1.060,053. Apr. 29, 1913. Winkler. Cal:buretor.
*1.128,958. Feb. 16, 1915. Duryea. Internal-combustion engine.
1,135,083. Apr. 13, 1915. Waite. Internal-combustion engine.
1,138,824. May 11, 1915. Wills. In ternal-combustion engine.
1,152,003. Aug. 31, 1915. Butler. Gas producer for explosive engines.
SUBCLASS 35, OIL ENGINES, EXTERNAL VAPORIZING.

377.866. Feb. 14, 1888. Spie>1. Petroleum engine.
399,569. Mar. 12, 1 89. Schiltz. Petroleum engine.
412.228. Oct. 8, 1889. Altmann & Kuppermanll. Petroleum motor.
425,909. Apr. 15. 1890. Roots. Petroleum engine.
428,764. May 27, 1890. Taverner. Engine or motor operated by explosive
mixtures.
*437,507. Sept. 30, 1890. Otto. Petroleum or oil motor engine.
*440,485. Nov. 11, 1890. Lindley & Browett. Liquid hydrocarbon motor
engine.
453,446. June 2, 1891. Lindner. Hydrocarbon engine.
482,201. Sept. 6, 1892. Schumm. Oil motor engine.

132

AERONAUTICS.

511,651. Dec. 26, 1893. Roots. Petroleum or liquid hydrocarbon engine.
518,151. Apr. 10, 1894. Knight. Vaporizer for hydrocarbon motor.
524,945. Aug. 21, 1894. Knight. Hydrocarbon motor.
544,879. Aug. 20, 1 95. Best. Gas engine and generator.
549,677. Nov. 12, 1895. Mayer. Vapor engine.
552,686. Jan. 7, 1896. Carter. Petroleum-oil engine.
*565,033. Aug. 4, 1896. Robinso n. Ga or oil engine.
*566,125. Aug. 18, 1896. Barker. Vaporizer for oil engines.
*578,834. Mar. 2, 1897. Bomborn. Vaporizer for p troleum engines.
582,271. May 11, 1897. Dawson. Oil or gas ena-ine.
589,108. Aug. 31, 1897. Wordsworth. Motor worked by hydrocarbon or other
gases.
600,107. Mar. 1, 1898. Wiseman & Holroyd. Hydrocarbon motor.
600,974. Mar. 22, 1898. Wiseman & Holroyd. Hydrocarbon motor.
633,319. Sept. 19, 1899. Inman. Carburetor.
668,773. Feb. 26, 1901. Han on. Vaporizer for e:-..-plosive engines.
*700,295. May 20, 1902. Bertheau. Four- troke petroleum motor.
*725,191. Apr. 14, 1903. Allsop. Petroleum engine.
*728,873. May 26, 1903. Cundall. Oil engine.
733,417. July 14, 1903. Nicholson. Internal-cumbustion engiue.
750,451. J an. 26, 1904. Grant. Vaporizer for gas engine.
773,245. Oct. 25, 1904. Cappell. Colling motors.
*860,630. July 23, 1907. Brady. Valve geat· for internal-combustion engines.
*951,353. Mar. 8, 1910. Weller. Gas engine.
1,135,082. Apr. 13, 1915. Waite. Internal-combustion ena-ine.
1,135,083. Apr. 13, 1915. Waite. Internal-combu tiQn ena-ine.
1,157.287. Bellem & Br gera . Internal-combu tion engine.
Re. 11,633. Oct. 12, 1897. Gas engine and generator.
SUBCLASS 52, loIULTIPLE CYLI "DER.

*1,12 ,717. Feb. 16, 1915. Ottaway. Carburetor.
ov. 9, ]915. Orlopp. Fuel connection for internal-combustion en1,159,985.
gines.
SUBCLASS 73, TWO-CYCLE, REAR-COUPRESSION CRANK CASE.

*1,096,819. May 19, 1914. Ahlberg. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,102,025. June 30, 1914. Ellis. Fuel injector for explo ion engines.
*1,139,364. May 11, 1915. Obergfell. Internal-combu tion engine.
SUBCLASS 7 6, FOUB-CYCLE SCAVENGING.

1,146,864.

July 20, 1915. Gibson.

In ternal-combustion engine.

SUBCLASS 9 , SPEED REGULATORS, loIANUALLY CONTROLLED.

*775,103. Nov. 15, 1904. Duryea. Internal-combustion engine.
*872,138. Nov. 26, 1907. Mayer. Valve gear.
962,248. June 21, 1910. Rockwell. Mechanism for feeding fuel.
*998,355. July 18, 1911. Lee. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
1,020,379. Mar. 12, 1912. Weiwoda. Throttle valve for carburetors.
*1,029,685. June 18, 1912. Huff. Controlling mechanism for motor vehicles.
SUBCLASS 99, SPEED REGULATORS, COMBINED TYPES .

368,444. Aug. 16, 1887. Baldwin. Gas engine.
1,138,831. May 11, 1915. Baker et al. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,153,364. Sept. 14, 1915. Warner. Internal-combustion engine.
1,186,037. June 6, 1916. Purdy. Control system for internal-combustion engines.
SUBCLASS 100, SPEED REGULATORS, CHARGE VOLUloIE PROPORTION VARYING.

408,683. Aug. 13, 1889. Baldwin. Gas engine.
*862,574. Aug. 6, 1907. Messinger . Carburetor.
*985,703. Feb. 28, 1911. Podlesak. Internal-combustion engine.

AERONAUTICS.

133

*1,014,328. Jan. 9, 1912. Podlesak. Mixture-producing and speed-governing
device for gas engines.
*1,064,514. June 10, 1913. Mees. Method of reguluting and controlling the
valve motion in explosive motors.
SUBCLAS S 101, SPEED REGULATORS, CHARGE VARYING AND OMITTING.

*754,001.

Mar. 8, 1904.

Mutel.

Regulating device for engines.

SUBCLASS 102, SPEED REGULATORS, ELECTRICAL.

*727.565. May 12, 1903. Apple. Electric governor for gas engines.
1,089,478. Mar. 10, 1914. KaB
ley. E"llloBion motor.
SUB CLASS 103, SPEED REGULATORS, PNEUMATIC.

*626,120. May 30, 1899. Winton. ExplOSive engine.
663,183. Dec. 4, 1900. Millot. Speed governor for explosive engines.
762,965. June 21, 1904. Washburne. Feed mechanism for explosive engines.
782,244. Feb. 14, 1905. Hayclon. Governor for explosion engines.
1,142,219. June 8, 1915. Ziegler. Governing and throttling clevice for internalcombustion engines.
SUBCLASS 104, SPEED REGULATORS, SUPPLY PUMP, REGULATING.

906,022. D ec. 8, 1908. H es.·elmann. Fuel pump ofr r eversible internal-combu!r
tion engine.
1,017,591. F eb. 13, 1912. Rigby. l\lethod of "'overning internal-combustion
engines.
1,067,424. July 15, 1913. Hamke. Fuel pump f or internal-combustion engines.
1,166,230. Dec. 28, 1915. Lemp. Fuel pump.
SUBCLASS 10 6, CHARGE PROPORTION VARYING.

1,075,635.
1,0 3,433.
1,089,462.
1,107,103.
*1,144,549.

Oct. 14, 1913. Elkin. Cm·buretor.
Jan. 6, 1914. Crist. Explosion motor.
Mal'. 10, 1914. Crist. Explosion motor.
Aug. 11, 1914. Peaslee. Carburetor.
June 29, 1915. Kane. Carbureting internal-combustion engines.
SUBCLASS 108, TH:ROTTLING.

*882,170. Mar. 17, 1908. Schmidt. CarbUretor.
*889,032. 1\1ay 26, 1908. McClintock. Combined carburetor and governor for
internal-combustion engines.
*1,105,142. July 28, 1914. Jager. Internal-combustion engine.
1,130,103. 1\1a r. 2, 1915. Plumm. Throttle valve for carburetors.
*1,149,597. Aug. 10, 1915. Riker. Regulating means for internal-combustion
engines.
SUBCLASS 112, SUPPLY-VALVE REGULATING.

*599,376.

Feb. 22, 1898.

White.

Gas-engine attachment.

SUBCLASS 117, AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLED IGNITING DEVICES.

1,163,692. Dec. 14, 1915. Royce. ContrOlling device for the electrical ignition
systems of internal-combustion engines.
SUBCLASS 122, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, HEATING.

276,075. Apr. 17, 1883. QuiCk. Tramway locomotive.
400,850. Apr. 2, 1889. Humes. Hyclrocarbureted air engine.
407,961. July 30, 1889. McNett. Combined gas engine and carburetor.
*573,762. Dec. 22, 1896. Charter. Gas engine.
*657,738. Sept. 11, 1900. Jessen. Cal'bUl'etor for explosive engine.
*673,901. May 14, 1901. Eckhard. Mixer and vaporizer for gas engines.

134

ABRON AUTICS.

*676,285. June 11, 1901. Van Duzen. Spraying nnd vapor i?:ing device fo r
crude-oil explosive engines.
*759,001. May 3, 1904. Mohler. Carburetor for hydrocarbon enginef':.
766,530. Aug. 2, 1904. Salisbury. Apparatus for generation of gns.
776,982. Dec. 6, 1904. Anderson. Carbureting appa ratus for e:l..lllosive eugines.
854,096. May 21, 1907. Levering. Gas engine.
862,377. Aug. 6, 1907. Bacon. Explosive engine.
900,083. Oct. 6, 1908. - - - . Gas engine.
916,999. Apr. 6, 1909. Chamber. Air heater for gasoline engines.
920,167. May 4, 1909. McIntyre. Internal-combustion engine.
946,239. Jan. 11, 1910. Low et at. Internal-combu tion engine.
967,117. Aug. 9, 1910. Durand. Means for cooling the cylinders of internalcombustion engines.
968,002. Aug. 23, 1910. Utz. Induction conduit for e,,!)losion engines.
971,034. Sept. 27, 1910. Fuller. Air intake for carburetor .
972,547. Oct. 11, 1910. Law. Gas engine.
9 6,357. Mar. 7, 1911. Bullert. Hot-air intake.
990.741. Apr. 25, 1911. Jacobs. Fuel feeding means for e"lllosiye engines.
*994,658. June 6, 1911. Reichenbach. Carbureting system.
998,124. July 18, 1911. Scripps. Intake manifold.
1,032,937. July 16, 1912. Pierce. Carburetor h eater.
1,035,614. Au"". 13, 1912. Low et al. Yaporizing device for explosive engines.
1,048.576. Dec. 31, 1912. Page. H eating device fo r carburetor .
1,050,625. Jan. 14, 1913. Dortch. Internal-combu tion ena-ine.
*1,067,906. July 22, 1913. Esnault et a l. Device for heating the carbaretors
of combustion engines and more particularly for fl~- ing-machine engine .
1,078,919.
l OV. 18, 1913. Hall.
In ternal-combu tion engine.
1,0 3,673. J all. 6, 1914. Ellis. Internal-combustion enO'ine.
1,093,756. Apr. 21, 1914. Beasley. Device for h eating charge for explosive
engines.
1,099,271. June 9, 1914. Sykora. Internal-combu tion engine.
1,099, .,1.2. June 9, 1914. Cobb. Manifold construction for eJ\:plo il'e engine.
1,099,862. June 9, 1914. Schroder. l\Iethod of operating internal·combustion
engines and preheating c1eyice therefor.
1,101,365. June 23, 1914. Weaver. Fuel heater for internal-combustion engine .
*1,101,913. June 30, 1914. Fay. Internal-combu tion engine.
*1,103,451. July 14, 1914. Thorney. Combustion engine.
*1,105,017. July 2 ,1914. Ba sford. E,,!)lo il'e engine.
1,106,452. Aua-. 11, 1914. Ittner. Gasoline vaporizer.
*1,106,881. Aug. 11, 1914. Marnyama. Internal-combustion engine.
1.109.628. Sept. 1, 1914. Hallett. Rotary valye for explo.. ive engines.
1,110,724. Sept. 15, 1914. Stewart. Carbureting mean for u e with heavy
fuels.
1,112.5 9. Oct. 6, 1914. Ashmusen. Internal-combustion engine.
1,124,157. Jan. 5, 1915. Low. Internal-combu tion engine u 'inO' liquid fuel.
1,124,916. Jan. 12, 1915. Knudson. Uanifold for internal-combustion engines.
1,125,446. Jan. 19, 1915. Bea ley. Device for heating charges for explo 'ive
engines.
1,131,016. Uar. 9, J915. Thornton et al. Air-heating device for explo ive engines.
J,133,712. Mar. 30, 1915. Doyle. Cooling system.
"'1,133,845. Mar. 30, 1015. Farnsworth. Explosive engine.
1,134,667. Apr. 6, 1915. Brooke. Interoal-combu. tion ena-ine.
1,135,074. Apr. 13, 1915. T aylor et al. Explosion ena-ine.
1,135,113. Apr. 13, 1915. Hitchcock. Vapor heater for internal-combu tion
engine .
~1,137,057.
Apr. 27, 1915. Halliday. Heavy-oil carbureting sy tern for internal-combustion engines.
1,142,090. June 8, 1915. Griesbach. Vaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
1,149,710. Aug. 10, 1915. Beck. Heavy-oil carburetor for explo iye engines.
1,151,503. Aug. 24, 1915. Wi\esmith. Apparatus for heatin'" the combustible
charges of internal-combu tion engines.
1,152,744. Sept. 7, 1915. McNutt. Revaporizer for internal-combustion engines.
1,159,446.
ov. 9, 1915. Watts. Carburetor.

AERONAUTICS.

13 5

1,160,192. Nov. 16, 1915. Nelson. Carburetor warmer.
1,168,111. Jan. 11, 1915. Pope. Fuel-heating apparatus for internal-combustion engines.
1,170,337. Feb. 1, 1916. R obinson et al. Air heater for carburetors.
*1,171,145. Feb. 8, 1915. Lachs. Car buretor.
1,178,276. Apr. 4, 1916. Straube!. Fuel-heating device for internal-combustion
encrines.
*1,178,972. Apr. 11, 1916. Tracy. Charge-forming device for internal-combustion engines.
1,180,176. Apr. 18, 1916. Moreton. Carbureting apparatus.
1,190,129. July 4, 1916. DuBois. Carburetor heater.
*1,190,592. July 11, 1916. Roraback. Manifold for gas engines.
SUBCLASS 123, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, GOVERNOR-CONTROLLED.

371,849. Oct. 18, 1887. Lister et al. Petroleum motor. .
397,517. Feb. 12, 1889. Priestman. Method of working hydrocarbureted air
engines.
509,462. Nov. 28, 1893. Caps. Carburetor fo r gas engines.
*552,263. Dec. 31, 1895. Roth. Generator for gas engines.
580,387. Apr. 13, 1897. Ellis. Explosive engine.
*583,508. June 1, 1897. Raymond. Gas engine.
*596,809. Jan . 4, 1 98. Guyer. Ga engine.
*614,114. Nov. 15, 1898. Lefebre. Oil or Similar motor.
638,440. Dec. 5, 1899. Brillie. Combined distributor and regulator for explosive engines.
*659,095. Oct. 2, 1900. Olsen. Gasoline encrine.
*671,714. Apr. 9, 1901. Wolfe. Go\·erning device for gasoline engines.
686,554. Nov. 12, 1901. Stearns. Speed regulator for explosive engines.
*709,126. Sept. 16, 1902. Vanduzen. Vaporizing device for explosive engines.
722,671. Mar. 17, 1903. Burger. Gas engine
*722,672. lUar. 17, 1903. Burger. Val,e for gas engines.
*729,377. May 26, 1903. Meister et a!. Combined governor and gas and air
mixer for explosive engines.
731,999. June 23, 1903. Hagan. Carburetor and governor for hydrocarbon
engines.
*734,421. July 21, 1903. Krebs. Fuel governor for oil engines.
*735,483. Aug. 4, 1903. Hydrocarbon mixer and regulator fo r engines.
*779,490. Jan. 10, 1905. McKaig. Mixing apparatus fo r explo ion or gasoline
engines.
*782,471. Feb. 14, 1905. Sterne et al. Internal-combustion engine.
*788,748. May 2, 1905. Bauer. Gas and oil engine.
*794,192. July 11, 1905. Seal. Internal-combustion engine.
806,512. Dec. 5, 1905. Abraham. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
863,916. Aug. 20, 1907. Gronvelle et a1. Speed regulator for internal-combustion engines.
*876,519. Jan. 14, 1908. Brothers. Charge forming device for internal combustion engines.
*885,598. Apr. 21, 1908. Frost. In ternal-combustion engine.
904,960. Nov. 24, 1908. Hukle. Carburetor and mixer.
*955,218. Apr. 19, 1910. Smith. Carburetor.
970,429. Sept. 13, 1910. Davis. Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.
1,075,635. Oct. 14, 1913. Elkin. Carburetor.
*1,076,268. Oct. 21, 1913. Carpenter. Carburetor regulating mechanism.
*1,123,508. Jan. 5, 1915. Farrell. Carburetor.
1,133,679. lUar. 30, 1915. T aylor. Governor for internal-combustion engine.
*1.151,156. Aug. 24, 1915. Bin"aman. Carburetor.
*1,154,530. Sept. 21, 1915. Merriam et al. Carburetor.
*1,155,094. Sept. 28, 1915. Podlesak. Mixture-reducing device and speed governor.
1,170,199. Feb. 1, 1916. Ver Planck. Governing mechanism for internalcombustion engines.
SunCLARS 124,

CHARGE-FOR~UNG

DEnCEs, AUTOMATIC DILUTION .

642,871. Feb. 6, 1900. New. Heavy oil engine.
*751,434. Feb. 2, 1904. Napier et al. Qarburetor for petrol motors.
823,185. June 12, 1906. Miller. Air valve for gas engines.

136

AERONAUTICS.

*831,832. Sept. 25, 1906. Coffin. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*83 ,085. Dec. 11, 1906. Cook. Carburetor for explosive engines.
*844,894. Feb. 19, 1907. Renault. Carburetor.
871,361.
ov. 19, 1907. Reioeking. Air intake r egulator for carburetors.
878,077. Feb. 4, 1908. Longuemare.
891,936. June 30, 1908. Jordanet et al. Carburetor.
894,286. July 2 , 1908. Reineking. Air intake and regulator for carburetors.
906,039. Dec. 8, 1908. Le Plain. Automatic double air inlet for carburetors.
939.549. Nov. 9. 1909. Reineking. Reed a ir·in take regulator for carburetors.
943.996. Dec. 2], 1909. Reineking. R eed air·intake regulator for carbur etors.
*997,232. July 4, 1911. Bowers. Cflrburetor.
1,050,200. Jan. 14, 1913. Aubery. Auxiliary air inlet deyice for internal-combu tion engines.
1,086,112. Feb. 3, ]914. Winkler. Mixture regulator.
1,0 ,302. Feb. 24, 1914. Scudder. Automatic air valve for gas manifolds.
l,li7,676. TOV. 17, 1914. Johnson. Automatic carburetor air supply r egulator.
1,117.993. Nov. 24, 1914. Frazier. Automatic valve.
1,142,194. June 8, 1915. Morgan. Auxiliary valve for internal-combustion
engines.
1,142,779. June 8, 1915. Umbarger. Gas-saving appliance.
*1,143,230. June 15, 1915. Root. Air-controlled deyice for gas engines.
1,168,309. J an. 18, 1916. Keiffer. Auxiliary valve for internal-combustion
engines.
1,171,457. Feb. 15, 19]6. Oldham. Air controller for explosive engines.
*1,189,786. July 4, 1916. Byrnes. '.rhermostatic-control de,ice for explosive
engines.
SUBCLASS 125, CHAlIGE-FORMING DEVICES, OlL INTERRUPTING.

Sept. 20, 1

370,242.

7.

Charter.

Gas engine.

SUBCLASS 12G, CIIARGE-FGR1fING DEVICES, MOVABLE CABRIER.

550.410. Nov. 26, 1895. Hardina. Gas generator.
712,42. Nov. 4, 1902. Jeffery. Carburetor for explosiye engines.
1,184,779. May 30, 1916. Shaw. Aerating fuel pump for explosive motors.
SUBCLASS 127, CHARGE-FORllING DEVICES,

~{ULTIPLE

OlL SUPl'LY.

*1,105,016. July 2 , 1914. • Bassford. Explosive engine.
*1,110,438. Sept. 15. 1914. Gore. Internal-combustion engine.
1,115,967. Nov. 3, 1914. Papenbrok. Attachment for explosive engines.
1.121,135. Dec. 15, 1914. Schmid. Internal-combustion engine.
1,180,169. Apr. 1 , 1916. ~larhenke . Fuel-injecting device for internal-co!Obustion engines.
SUBCLASS 128, CHAllGE-FORMI:\'G DEVICES, CONSTANT OlL SUPl'LY.

665,665. Jan. 8, 1901. Solomon. Gas engine.
670,945. Apr. 2, 1901. Ash. Vaporizing device for gas engines.
731,001. June 16, 1903. Williams. Explosh'e engine.
1.189,338. Jul y 4, 1916. Askew. Internal-combustion engine.
SUBCLASS 129, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES , VALVE-CONTROLLED OlL.

*418,029.
*598,832.
*748,990.
*795.273.
* 68,392.
.. 77,753.
*887,422.

Dec. 24, 1 9. Rorting. Automatic valve and ignitor for gas engines.
Feb. , 1 !l. Winton. Explosive engine.
J an. 5, 1904. Segner. Feed regulator fo r gasoline engines.
July 25, 1905. Essner . Carbur etor.
Oct. 15, ]907. Allsop. Petroleum engine.
Jan. 2 , 190. Ash. Gas engine.
May 12, 190. Power. Mixing yah-e for internal-combustion engines.

SUBCLASS 1 30, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, VALVE-CONTROLLED OlL, POSITIVELYOPERATED.

*517,344. Mar. 27, 1894. Lambert. Carburetor.
731.547. Ju ne 23, 1903. Corne et al. Carburetor for explosion motors.
827,303. Jul y 31, 1906. Goodspeed. Valve gea r for internal-combustion engines.
1,159,178. Nov. 2, 1915. Cook. Injector.

AERONAUTICS.

137

SUBCLASS 133, CHARGE·FORMING DEVICES, OIL-EVAPORATING.

39,448. Aug. 4, 1863. Kratze. Improvements in gas engines.
331,078. Nov. 24, 1885. Nash. Explosive-vapor engine.
335,462. Feb. 2, 1886. Lenoir. Gas engine.
4 0,535. Aug. 9, 1892. Weatherhogg. Petroleum or similar engine.
577.189. Feh. ](), 1897. Lewis. Vapor engine.
606,504. June 28, lR98. Bonton. E:!..'Plosive engine.
*635,298. Oct. 24, 1 99. Cauda. Carburetor.
784,(176. Mar. 14, 1905. Hiltschet·. Carburetor for gas engines.
785,808. Mar. 28, 1905. Keating. Carburetor for hydrocarbon engines.
*844,900. Feb. 19, 1907. Smith. Carburetor.
*85 ,046. June 25, 1907. ·Westerndorp. Vaporizer for e:\.lliosive en~ines.
86 ,246. Oct. 15, 1907. Bates. Generating oil gas for explosive engines.
879.659. Feb. 18, 1908. Low. Hydrocarbon motor.
934,599. Sept. 21, 1909. Flint. Apparatus for vaporizing hydrocarbon oils.
1,110,807. Sept. 15, 1914. Lucke. Vaporizer for intemnl-combustion engines.
1,111,140. Sept. 22, 1914. Deering. Gas-generating sy. tern.
1,156,780. Oct. 12, 1915. Honnold. Combined fuel and cooling system for ve·
hicle engines.
SUBCLASS 134,

CII.~RGE-FORMING

DEVICES, OIL-EVAPORATING, SUBMEllGED AIl! SUPPLY.

499,597. June 13, 1893. Salomon. Carburetor.
642,562. Jan. 30, 1900. Probert. Vaporizer for gas engines.
SUBCLASS 135, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, EXTENDED OIL FILM.

406,540. July 9, 18 9. Schlitz. Hydrocnrbon engine.
651,0]7. June 5, 1900. Marne. Carburetor.
685,504. Oct. 29, 1901. Bole et a1. Carburetor.
*947,633. Jan. 25. 1910. Brady. Internal-combustion engine.
1,185,224. May 30, 1916. Manley. Internal-combustion engine.
SUBCLASS 136, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, OIL-FEEDING.

200,970. Mar. 5, 1878. Brady. Improvement in gas engines.
496,751. May 2, 1893. Schumm. Apparatus for supplying oil or other liquids
under pressure.
509,830. Nov. 28, 1893. Seck. Hydrocarbon motor.
645,45. Mar. 13, 1900. - - - . Oil-di. tributing means for oil engines.
652,470. June 2G, 1900. Cascaden et al. Explosive engines.
686,287. Nov. 12, 1901. Grenter. Feed mec11anism for gasoline or like e.n·
gines.
*709.428. Sept. 16, 1902. Wa rring. Hydrocarbon feeder for explo lve engines.
752,181. Feb. 16, 1904. Ronan. Raw liquid fuel measurer for explosive engines.
817,671. Apr. 10, 1906. Rosseau et al. Oil engine.
''849,048. Apr. 2, 1907. Cable. Fuel feed for hydrocarbon engines.
890.522. June 9, 1!J08. MacKaskie. Charge-supplying menns for internal-com, bustion engines.
D33,325. Sept. 7, 1909. McCartey. Fuel feeder for internal-combustion engine.
973,880. Oct. 25, 1910. Rammen. Auxiliary liquid hydrocarbon tank for inter·
nal-combustion engine.
997,136. July 4, 1911. Johnston. Device for supplying oil to internal-combustion engine.
1,002,626. Sept. 5, 1911. Baltezor. Internal-combustion engine.
1,011,931. Dec. 19, 1911. Farquharson. Force-feed carburetor.
1,036,424. Aug. 20, 1912. Bellem et a1. Pump feeding mechanism for internal·
combustion engines.
1,049,815. Jan. 7, 1913. Day et al. Starting mechanism for Internal-combustion engines.
1,095.763. May 5, 1914. Winton. Fuel-supply system for automobiles.
* 1,106,115. Aug. 4, 1914. Schneider. Charge-forming device for internal·
combustion engines.
1,112,975. Oct. 6, 1914. Bush. Oil-distributing mechanism.
1,154,994. Sept. 28, 1915. Lasche. Fuel-f;upply system fo r engines.
1,189,096. June 27, 1916. Grunwald. Pumping apparatus.

138

AERONAUTICS.
SUBCLASS 137, CHARGE·FORMING DEVICES, OIL FEEDING, RECIPROCATING.

650,266. May
664,981. Jan.
g ines.
722,431. Mar.
880,502. Mar.

22, 1900. McDuff. Feed for explo 'ion engines.
1, 1901. Thornton et a l. Oil-feeding device for e::-..-plosion en10, 1903. Packard. Hydrocarbon motor.
3, 1908. Boyler. Carburetor fOl' e::-..-plosion engines.

SUBCLaSS 138, CHARGE-FORAfING DEVICES, OIL FEEDING, ROTARY.

580,444. Apr. 13, 1897. Baker. Gas engine.
626,840. June 13, 1899. MacCallum. Apparatus for injecting fu el into combustion chambers of internal-combustion engines.
770,731. Sept. 27, 1904. Anderson. F eed valve for explo 'iye engines.
1.177,216. Mar. 28, 1916. Summers. Carburetor.
1,180,334. Apr. 25, 1916. Summers. Carbu reto r.
1,18~,572.
June 27, 1916. Summers. Carburetor.
SUBCLASS

1 39, CHARGE-FOR11ING DEVICES, PU1>IPS.

774,034. Nov. 1, 1904. Brillie. Fuel-feeding mechanism for internal-combustion
motors.
1,011,931. Dec. 19, 1911. Farquharson. Force-feed carburetor.
SUBCLA S 140, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, GOVERNOR CONTROL.

970,429.

Sept. 13, 1910.

Davis.

Carburetor for internal-combustion engines.

SUBCLASS 141, CHARGE-FORMING DEVICES, :i\IIXI::I'G DEVICES.

650,736. May 29, 1900. Sutton. Explosive engine.
* 755 ,093. Mar. 22, 1904. Wright. Yaporizer for hydrocarbon engines.
* 868,707. Oct. 22, 1907. Schneider. Carburetor.
948,402. F eb. 8, 1910. Preston. Vaporizing and mixinO' device.
* 970,251. Sept. 13, 1910. Martha. Internal-combu tion engine.
1,012,380. Dec. 19, 1911. Loose. Mixer for internal-combustion engines.
1,031,753. July 9, 1912. Westaway. Mixer for in ternal-combu tion engines or
the like.
1,051,369. Jan. 21, 1913. Heath. Charge-mixing device for gas engines.
1,103,931. July 21, 1914. Bennett. Intake manifold.
SUBCLASS

434,695.
928,710.

142, CHARGE-}-ORMING DEVICES, SAFETY DEnCES.

Aug. 19', 1890.
July 20, 1909.
SUBCLASS

Barrett et a l. Ga or vapor engine attachment.
SvagelL. Carburetor.

180, COMBUSTIBLE 1IIXTUBE SUPPLY

TART! 'G DEVICES .

882,597. Mar. 24, 1908. Walker. Starting device for internal-combustion engines.
892.544. July 7, 1908. Odenbrett. Engine starter.
920,515. May 4, 1909. Nagora. Starting device for explosive engines.
921.995. May 18, 1900. Jackson. Auxiliary starting device for automobile
960,690. June 7, 1910. Pagelsen. Starting device for explo ive engines.
969,815. Sept. 13, 1910. Walker. Starting d 'vice for intel'Ual-combustion
engines.
983.168. Jan. 31, 1911. Sackrider. Starter for intcrnal-combu tion engine.
985,011. Feb. 21, 1911. Daniels et a\. Gas-engine starter.
990.135. Apr. 18, 1911. Hunt. Engine starter.
1,000,595. Aug. 15, 1911. Gibbon. Starting device for internal-combustion
engines.
*1,014,988. Jan. 16, 1912. Hinkley. Carburetor.
*1,039,229. Sept. 24, 1912. Walker. Carburetor.
1,051,122. Jan. 21, 1913. Krayer. Means fot' supplying explosive mixture to
explosive engines.
1.161,536. May 13, 1913. Fuhrer. Gasoline engine tarter.
1,080,773. Dec. 9, 1913. Myers. EnO'ine starter.
1,081.534. Dec. 16, 1913. Priming attachment for explosive engines.
1,088,792. Mar. 3, 1914. Perldns. ExplOSive engine priming mechanism.
1,100,091. June 16, 1914. Pennington. Engine start er.

139

AERONAUTICS.

1,102,091. June 30, 1914. Shockley et at. Starting mechanism for internalcombustion engines.
1,102,475. July 7, 1914. Coc!u·an. Means for creating and upplying explosive
mixture to explo ive engines.
1,117,141. Nov. 10, 1914. Smith. Explosive mixture heater and diluter.
1,157,868. Oct. 26, 1915. Higgins. Carburetor.
1,164,357. Dec. 14, 1915. Kaufmann. Primer.
CLASS 261, GAS AND LIQUID CONTACT APPARATUS.
SUBCLASS 10, WITH HEATING OR COOLING, INTERCHANGING.

853,653. May 14, 1907.

Stewart.

Gasifier.

SUBCLASS 12, WITH HEATING OR COOLING, HEaTING.

660,954. Oct. 30, 1900. Hayes. Fuel vaporizer and mixer for explosive engines and other uses.
672,500. Apr. 23, 1901. Van Duzen. Vaporizing device for crude oil explosive
engines.
*733,695. July 14, 1903. Charron & Gerardot. Pulverizing carburetor for
petroleum motors.
*817,051. Apr. 3, 1906. Dorman. Carburetor for explo. ive motor and engines.
909,897. J an. 19, 1909. Hertzberg. External electrical vaporizer for combustion engines.
SUBCLASS 13, WITH HEATING OR COOLING, HEATING, GAS.

*668,953. Feb. 26, 1901. Da,,·son. Yapor izing device for explosive engines.
*Re.12,322. Feb. 28, 1905. Dawson. Vaporizin" device for explosive engines.
SUBCLASS 15, WITH HEATING OR COOLING, HEATING, LIQUID.

*804,589.

Nov. 14, 190:-.

Enrico.

Carburetor for explo ion motors.

SUBCLASS 26, FLUID DISTRIBUTION, PUMPING, AUTOMATIC CONTROL.

270,927.

Jan. 23, 1883. Brayton.

Regulating the . upply of oil to vapor engines.

SUBCLASS 38, FLUID DISTRIDUTION, VALVED.

*993,516. May 30, 1911. Gentle. CarbUl·etor.
996,018. June 20, 1911. Heine. Carburetor and relief valve for explosive
engines.
SUBCLASS 41, FLUID DISTRIBUTION, VALVED, MULTIPLE JET, PROGRESSIVE.

*818, 53.

Apr. 24, 1906.

Renault.

Carburetor.

SUBCLASS 44, FLUID DISTRIBUTION, VALVED, ~lULTIPLE VaLVES,

*751,913. Feb. 9, 1904.
sive engines.

Haynes and Apperson.

co

"NECTED.

Carbureting device for explo-

SUBCLASS 50, FLUID DISTRIBUTION, VALVED. MUr.TIPLE VALVES, CONNECTED, LIQUID
INLET, WITH GAS INLET.

*687,840. Dec. 3, 1901. Kra. ·ten. Fuel-mixing and charge-controlling apparatus for hydrocarbon explosive engines.
*970,251. Sept. 13, 1910. Martha. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,114,222. Oct. 20, 191~. Bingham. Carburetor.
SUBCLASS 51, FLUID DISTRIBUTION, VALVED, lIIULTIPLE VALVES, CONNECTED, LIQUID
INLET, WITH GAS OUTLEI'.

*627,372. June 20, 1899. Winton. Fuel feeder or regulator for explosive
engines.
*635,298. Oct. 24, 1899. Canda. Carburetor.
686,287.
'ov. 12, 1901. Gl'eutel'. Feed mechanism for gasoline 01' like engines.
*868,707. Oct. 22, 1907. Schneider. Carburetor.
*906,671. Dec. 15, 1908. Abernethy. Carburetor for explosive engines.

140

AERONAUTICS.

SORCLASS 54, FLUID DISTRIDUTION, VAJ"VED, MULTIPLE VALVES, GAS BY-PASS_

June 30, 1908.

891,936.

Jordanet et al.

Carburetor.

SUBCLASS 59, FLUID DISTRIDUTION, VALVED, MULTIPLE VALVES, LIQUID INLET, WITH
GAS INLET.

June 4, 1901.

675,424.

Sturtevant. Carburetor for e:qJlosi,e engines.

SUBCLASS 62, FLUID DISTRIDUTION, VALVED, CONTACT SPACE.

*811,397. Jan. 30, 1906.

Hibbard.

Vaporizer.

SUBCLASS 65, FLUID DIS'fRIDUTION, VdLVED, GAS OUTLET.

June 16, 1903.

731,001.

William.

EXl,JlO ive engine.

SUBCLASS 67, FLUID DISTRffiUTION, VALVED, LIQUID INLET, PLUBAL

*692,444. Feb. 4, 1902.

Harris. Carburetor for explosive engines.

SUBCLASS 68, FLUID DISTRffiUTION, VALVED, LIQUID INLET, PLUBAL, FLOAT AND
MANUAL.

*"844,900.

Feb. 19, 1907.

Smith. Carburetor.

SUBCLASS 81, CONTACT DEVICES, RECIPROCATI "G.

862,856.

Aug. 6, 1907.

Tygard.

Vibrative liquid atomizer and mixer.

SUBCLASS 84, CONTACT DEVICES, ROTATING, IMPELLER.

610,040. Aug. 30, 1898. Ford. Carburetor.
1,114,764. Oct. 27, 1914. Hopkins. Fluid-fuel feeder.
SUBCLASS 104, CONTACT DEVICES, POROUS SHEETS, SUBFACE CONTACT,
FEED.

39,448_

Aug. 4, 1863.

Kratze.

CA.l?ILLARY

Improvement in gas engine .

SUBCLASS 105, CO "TACT DEVICE, POROUS SHEET, GAS FLOW, CONTROL.

986,605. Mar. 14, 1911.
engines.

Svagel & Padfield.

Carburetor for gas and gasoline

CLASS 60, MISCELLA EOUS HEAT-ENGINE PLANTS.
SUBCLASS 4, ROTARY ENGINE.

1.185,982. June 6, 1916.
engine.

Casro.

Fluid mixer and power generator for rotary

SUBCLASS 36, COMBUSTION PRODUCTS INJECTED.

1,024,079. Apr. 23, 1912.

Jenning . Internal-combustion generator.

LIST NO.4.
SELECTED CRoss-REFERE CE PATENTS FR01f THE SEARc;HED SUBCLASSES, WITH
PATENTS WHICH ApPEAR IN EITHER OF THE THREE PREVIOUS LISTS OMITTED.

3,597. May 25, 1844. Perry. Gas enginll.
4,800. Oct. 7, 1846. Perry. Ga engine.
168,623. Oct. 11, 1 75. Daimler. Air and gas engine.
195,585. Sept. 25, 1 77. Dreckmann. Gas engines.
258,884. June 6, 1882. Burritt. Gas motor engine.
260,513. July 4, 1882. Wigmore. Gas motor engine.
301,009. June 24, 1 84. Rachholz. Gas engine.
322,062. July 14, 1885. Nash. Combined fuel converter and gas engine.

l

AERONAUTICS.

141

331,080. Nov. 24, 1885. Nash. Method of operating gas engine.
333,838. Jan. 5, 1886. Delamare et al. Gas engine.
339,225. Apr. 6. 1886. Sintz. Gas engine.
340,453. Apr. 20, 1886. Nash. Gas engine.
347,469. Aug. 17, 1 86. Clal·k. Gas engine.
347,656. Aug. 17, 1886. Smith. Gas engine.
383,775. May 29, 1888. Sintz. Gas engine.
402,549. Apr. 30, 1889. Wilcox. Gas or air engine.
414,173. Oct. 29, 1889. Stevens. Combined gas and compressed air engine.
415,446. Nov. 19, 18 9. Charter. Hydrocarbon Ol' gas engine.
*417,924. Dec. 24, 1889. Korting. Method of automatic ignition in gas engines.
421,473. Feb. 18, 1890. Baker. Gas engine.
424,000. Mar. 25, 1890. Hibbard. Rotary gas engine.
*433,806. Aug. 5, 1 90. Otto. l\Iotor engine worked by oil vapor.
*433,807. Aug. 5, 1890. Otto. Motor engine worked by oil vapor.
436,936. Sept. 23, 1890. Eisenhuth. E1.l.)lo ive engine.
439,200. Oct. 28, 1890. Shanck. Gas engine.
439,702. Nov. 4, 1890. Stuart. Petroleum engine or motor.
*44 ,386. Mar. 17, 1891. Vanduzen. Gas or gasoline engine.
451,621. May 5, 1891. Lewis. Gas engine.
455,388. July 7, 1891. Charter. Gas engine.
*456,284. July 21, 1891. Coffield et al. Gas engine.
460,070. Sept. 22, 1891. Hobbs. Rotary gas engine.
*482,202. Sept. 6, 1892. Schumm. Gas or oil motor engine.
498,700. May 30, 1893. Walls. Gas engine.
506,817. Oct. 17, 1 93. Hobbs. Gas engine.
511,535. Dec. 26, 1893. Lewis. Gas engine.
511. 55. Jan. 2, 1 94. Mann. Electrohydrocarbon engine.
522,712. July 10, 1894. Hirsch. Gas engine.
*523,511. July 24, 1894.
ampell. Oil engine.
525,651. Sept. 4, .1894. Grant. Gas engine.
*525,857. Sept. 11, 1894. McGeorge. Gas engine.
532,099. Jan. 8, 1895. Robinson. Gas or vapor and air mixing and spraying
device.
*532,100. Jan. 8, 1895. Robinson. Vaporizing and ignition device.
532,412. Jan. 8, 1895. BiJbault. Gas or petroleum engine.
*534,354. Feb. 19, 1895. Weber. Gas engine.
536,029. Mar. 19, 1895. Gill. Gas engine.
537,253. Apr. 9, 1895. Van Zandt. Gas engine.
*537,370. Apr. 9, 1895. Walls. Gas engine.
*539,710. May 21, 1895. Sintz. Gas engine.
541,773. June 25, 1895. Mead. Gas engine.
543,094. July 23. 1895. Hopkins. Motor for bicycles.
*548,922. Oct. 29, 1895. Norman. Gas and oil engine.
550,163. Nov. 19, 1895. Durand. Compressed-air motor.
550,266. Nov'. 26, 1895. Froelich. Gas engine.
'"550,451. Nov. 26, 1 95. Lanson et al. Gas engine.
*550,785. Dec. 3, 1895. Friend. Hydrocarbon motor.
555,373. Feb. 25, 1896. Henriod-Scl1weizer. Petroleum motor.
560,149. May 12, 1896. Rober. Vapor engine.
562,230. Jnne 16, 1896. Mex. Petroleum motor.
563,249. July 7, 1896. Baker. Gas engine.
564,576. July 21, 1896. Altham. Oil engine.
564,577. July 21, 1896. Altharn. Oil engine.
565,786. Aug. 11, 1896. Old et al. Gas or vapor engine.
569,530. Oct. 13, 1896. Winter. Gas en ine.
571,534. Nov. 17, 1896. Lewis. Gas engine.
*574,183. Dec. 29, 1896. Underwood. Mixer for gas engin~.
574,535. Jan. 5, 1897. Grohrnann. Gas engine.
579,554. Mar. 23, 1897. Blum. Gas motor.
582,108. May 4, 1897. Winton. Explosive engine.
*584,666. June 15, 1897. Boll~e. Motor vehicle.
*588,466. Aug. 17, 1897. Pace. Combustion engine.
*595,043. Dec. 7, 1897. Chase. Gas engine .
•'595,552. Dec. 14, 1897. Banki et al. Gasoline motor.
*596,809. J an. 4, 1898. Guyer. Gas engine.

142

AERONAUTICS.

597.389. Jan. 18, 1898. Bullis. Gasoline ·engine.
598,025. J an. 25, 1898. Simark. Gas engine.
599,235. Feb. 15, 1898. Hider. Explo 'ive engine.
*599,375. Feb. 22, 1898. White. Gas engine.
*599,376. Feb. 22, 1898. White. Gas-engine attachment.
"600,147. Mar. 8, 1898. Halvorson. ElI:plo ive engine.
602,556. Apr. 19, 1 98. Dayle. Gas or gaSOline engine.
603.318. l\lay 3, 1898. Clover. Oil gas motor.
*603,986. May 10,] 98. Henriod. EA--plosive engine.
"'608,968. Aug. 8, 1898. Mora va. Gas or oil motor for bicycles.
*610,460. Sept. 6, 1898. Petrot. Self-propelling carriage.
615,978. Dec. 13, 1898. Fielding. Internal-combustion motor.
617,022. Jan. 3, 1 99. Il'gens et al. l\leans for converting heat into motoric
force.
618,972. Feb. 7, 1899. Alsop. Gas enaines.
*619,776. Feb. 21, 1899. l\lurray. Gas engine.
620,602. Mar. 7, 1899. Maxim. Explosive engine.
622,798.
'ov. 11, 1 99. Fa .... er trom. Rerulating device for petroleum motor.
623,567. Apr. 25, 1 99. Secor. Speed regulator for explo ive engines.
*624,594. May 9, 1899. Wilkinson. Motive-po wei' mechanism.
*626,121. May 30, 1 99. Winton. Speed r egulator for explosive engine.
*627,219. J une 20,1899. Woolf. Ail' and gas engine.
*627,359. June 20, 1899. Steele. Automobile vehicle.
632,474. Sept. 5, 1899. Sangster. Motor-driven v hicle.
""632,917. Sept. 12, 1 99. Dallenbach. Explosive engine.
*635.218. Oct. 17, 1 99. Winton. Oil valve for gasoline engine.
*636,048. Oct. 31,] 99. Korsmeyer. Ga oline or gas engine.
63 ,331. Dec. 5, 1 99. Grant. Motor vehicle.
"640,394. J an. 2, 1900. Lewis. Gas engi.ne.
*640,674. J an. 2, 1900. Lewis. EA--plosive engine.
640,890. J an . 9, 1900. Eisenburth. Air and gas engine.
641.727. J a n. 23, 1900. Robertson et al. Gasoline engine.
652,544. June 26, 1900. Miller. Gas engine.
*658,127. Sept. 18, 1900. Simmonds. Ga or gaSOline engine.
*658,367. Sept. 25, 1900. Haynes et al. Explo ive engine.
660,129. Oct. 23, 1900. Standish. Rotary explosive motor.
662,169. Nov. 20, 1900. Gender. Engine operated by flu id under pressure.
667,908. Feb. 12, 1901. Hatcher. Speed regulator for explosive engine.
*670, 03. MLlr. 26, 1901. McMahon. Ga engine.
673,109. Apr. 30. 1901. Brouder. Gas engine.
673,110. Apr. 30, 1901. Bronder. Motor vehicle.
681,287. Aug. 27, 1901. Worth. Speed r egulator for explosive engines.
*682,606. Sept. 12, 1901. Duryea. Explosive engine fo r motor vehicle.
*682,682. Sept. 17, 1901. Hafelfinger. I1!otor bicycle.
*684.011. Oct. 8, 1901. Valentynowicz. Explosive engine.
685.722. Oct. 29, 1901. Mancler. Rotary explosive engine.
*690,481. J an. 7, 1902. S,yeet. Explosive engine.
702,374. June 10, 1902. McCall. Air superheater 01' carburetor.
703,511. J uly I, 1902. Wood. Oil vapor engine.
706,711. Aug. 12, 1902. Anclres. Multiple-cylinder explosive engine.
707,793. Aug. 26, 1902. McKai"". Gasoline engine.
714,353. Nov. 25, 1902. Anderson et al. Combination hot-air and gas engine.
723,844. Mar. 31, 1903. Dinaman. Gas engine.
724,763. Apr. 7, 1903. Wallmann. Means for vaporizing water.
729,9 4. June 2, 1903. WaJlmann. Compound internal-combu tion engine.
737.069. Aug. 25, 1903. Brown. Engine worked by oil vapor or gas.
741.824. Oct. 20, 1903. Pehrsson. Gasoline engine.
742.799. Oct. 27, 1903. Ostergren. Intern al-combustion engine.
"'746,701. Dec. 15, 1903. Hibbard. Explosive engine.
748,509. Dec. 29, 1903. Klocksiem. Vah-e gen r for hydrocarbon traction engine::;.
757632. Apr. 19, 1904. Palmer. Explosive engine.
759:011. May 3, 1904. Pti tel'. Ga generator for explosive engine.
*760,333. May 17, 1904. Hardenbrool, et at Valve gea r fo r explosive engine.
763.039. June 21, 1904. Bates. Oil-gas g nerator.
763.773. JUlle 2 ,]904. M:lrlitt. Rotary explosive motor.
*765,814. July 26, 1904. Chamberlin. Explosive engine.

....

,.

AERONAUTICS.

143

772,131. Oct. 11, 1904. Clande!. Apparatus for the manufacture of gas.
775,243. Nov. 15, 1904. Losch. Explosive engine.
776,800. Dec. 6, 1904. Roch ow. Explosive engine.
776,982. Dec. 6, 1904. Anderson. Carbureting apparatus for explosive engines.
*778,154. Dec. 20, 1904. Sweeder. Gas engine.
787,254. Apr. 11, 1905. Young. Rotary carburetor.
795,422. July 25, 1905. Thomson. Means for preventing pounding in inter nalcombustion enO'ine.
796,686. Aug. 8, 1905. We tendorp. Explo ion engine.
801.927. Oct. 17, 1905. Smith. Fuel-mixing device for gas engines.
*806,139. Dec. 5, 1905. Hayes. Device for vaporizing liquids.
-806,760. Dec. 5, 1905. Van de Putte. Injecting and mixing device for hydrocarbon motors.
809,451. Jan. 9, 1906. Kyle et a1. Double-acting explo i\'e engine.
~312,371.
Feb. 13, 1906. Secor. Speed r egulator fo r explosi\'e engine.
*816,109. Mar. 27, 1906. Lutz. Explosive engine.
823,039. Ju ne ]2, 1906. Ell. Valve gear for explosive engine.
*825.531. July 10j1906. Franquist. Controller for motor vehicles.
828,352. Aug. 14, 906. Trinkler. Internal-combustion engine for liquid combustible.
*835,773. Nov.!Jj, 1906. Brady. Internal-combustion engine.
*846,434. Mar.~, 1907. Underwood. Internal-combu tion engine.
848,607. Mar. :l6, 1907. Thomson. Oil or gas engine.
848,8~1. APl';/2, 1907. Ford. Speed controller and r egulator for explosive englUes. /
849,578.. #1'. 9, 1907. Shad all. Motor for rock drills and similar tools.
*856,76Y_ June 11, 1907. Bense. Combustion engine.
857,7310. June 25, 1907. Goodspeed . Internal-combustion engine.
*8~,378 . July 30. 1907. Mayer. Speed-regulating device for a utomobiles.
862,377. Aug. 6, 1907. Bacon. Explosive engine.
* 66,002. Sept. 17, 1907. Dallenbach. Internal-combn tion engine.
868,608. Oct. 15, 1907. Low, et al. Hydrocarbon motor.
*874,822. Dec. 24, 1907. Baird. Carburetor.
876,003. Jan. 7, 1908. Lawless. Internal-combustion engine.
877,730. Jan. 28, 1908. Palmer. Explosive engine.
878.932. Feb. 11, 1908. Brady. Vaporizing device for internal-combustion
engines.
*879,884. Feb. 25, 1908. McClintock. Crude-oil engine.
880,704. Mar. 3,1908. Wood. Gas engine.
~882 , 170. Mar. 17, 1908. Schmidt. Carburetor.
882,939. Mar. 24, 1908. Fricke, et al. Mixing valve for explosive engine.
8 6.519. May 5, 1908. Knickerbocker. Internal-combu. tion en"'ine.
*886,760. May 5, 1908. Bru h. Carbureting mechani.·m for internal-combustion
engines.
~889,032.
l\lay 26. 1908. McClintock. Combined carburetor and governor for
internal-combu tion engine.
889,260. June 2, 1908. Poolesak, et al. Fuel-feeding device for internal-combustion hydrocarbon motors.
8 9,528. June 2, 1908. J effery. Speed-controlling mechani sm for automobile.
"891,064. June 16, 1908. Heathcock, et al. Eng-ine governor.
*892,501. July 7, 1908. Cogswell. Internal-combustion engine.
898,230. Sept. 8, 1908. Lake. Gas engine.
903,902. Nov. 17. 1908. Simmons. Combustion en"'ine.
904.267. Nov. 17,190. Korting, et a1. E)..-plos ion petroleum engine.
907,879. Dec. 29, 1908. Reeves, et al. Balanced proportioning valve for ex·
plosive eng-ine.
909,917. Jan. 19, 1909. Low. Electrically operated starting vaporizer for combustion engine '.
922,009. May 1 , 1909. Marquardt. Gasoline engine.
924.483. June 8. 1909. Manuel. Fuel feeder.
925,793. June 22, 1909. Atkins. Internal-combustion motor.
933,709. Sept. 7, 1909. I1I y. Mixing attachment for internal-combustion engines.
933,907. Sept. 14, 1909. Ill y. Combu tion pressure generator, mixer, and engine.
942,070. Dec. 7, 1909. Riggin. Internal-combustion motor.
944,867. Dec. 28, 1909. Hunter . Carburetor.
946,780. Jan. 18, 1910. John ton. I nter nal-comb ustion engine.

.,..

144

....

AERONAUTICS.

952,430. Mal'. 15, 1910. Higgins. Method of operating oil engines.
961,059. June 7, 1910. Abbott. Gas engine.
964,410. July 12, 1910. Fox. H eater fo r carburetor.
970,937. Sept. 20, 1910. Merrett, et ill.. Internal-combustion engine.
979,667. Dec. 27, 1910. Harpster. Vaporizer for internal-combustion engine.
989,026. Apr. 11, 1911. Murphy. Fuel injector for internal-combustion engines.
*991,029. May 2, 1911. Scott. Internal-combustion engine.
"994,687. June 6, 1911. Nageborn. Carburetor.
*1,017,750. July 18, 1911. Scripps. Intake manifold.
1,018,372. Feb. 20, 1912. Hanchett. Mixer for gaseous fuel.
"'1,022,803. Apr. 9, 1912. Troutt. Int~rn al-combustion engine.
1,024,303. Apr. 23, 1912. Willoughby. Aeroplane-engine controlling mechanism.
*1,026.425. May 14, 1912. Barthel. Carburetor.
J ,031,245. July 21, 1912. Chapin. Internal-combustion {mgine.
1,050,779. Jan. 14, 1913. Miller. Internal-combu tion en,lfine.
*1,054,728. Mar. 4, 1913. White et al. Power device.
1 ,058,591. Apr. 8, 1913. Jackson. Method and apparatus fo~' oper ating petroleum
explosive engines.
I
J .059,967. Apr. 29, 1913. Babbitt. Steam-supplied carburetor.
1,066,768. July 8, 1913. Vogt. Internal-combustion engine.
1,066,936. July 8, 1913. McKenzie. Means for supplyin liquid fuel to internal-combustion engines.
\
*1,068,195. July 22, 1913. White et a1. Power service.
1,068,830. July 29, 1913. Westaway. Vaporizing valve.
1,070,139. Aug. 12, 1913. Kessler. Explosive engine.
1,079,578. Nov. 25, 1913. Peterson. Internal-combustion engin~
1,079,950. Dec. 2, 1913. Norton. Vaporizing attachment.
~,~
1,081,228. Dec. 9, 1913. Fuchs. Fuel gasifier for internal-combusL~n engine.
1 ,085,425. Jan. 27, 1914. Hobe et al. Electrical primer.
1,086,634. Feb. 10, 1914. Wright. Hydrocarbon engine.
1,088,854. Mar. 3, 1914. Wadsworth. Fuel-feed system for engines wi'til., -.
starter.
1,093,553. Apr. 14, 1914. Eberle. Process of supplying fuels which ignite with
difficulty to internal-combustion engine.
1,096,056. May 12, 1914. Ray. Valve for explosive engines.
1,102,912. July 7, 1914. Harrington. In ternal-combustion motor.
1,104,968. July 28, 1914. Crothers. Internal-combustion engine.
1,105,047. July 28, 1914. Thomson. Oil engine.
1,107,103. Aug. 11, 1914. Peaslee. Carburetor.
*1,107,636. Aug. 18, 1914. Westenderp. Hydrocarbon engine.
1 ,111,335. Sept. 22, 1914. Walden. Fuel-oil delivery system for motor vehicles.
1,112,124. Sept. 29, 1914. Dunton. Fluid-pressure means for forcing fuel into
internal-combustion engines.
1,121,850. Dec. 22, 1914. Knesera. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,128,717. Feb. 16, 1915. Ottoway. Carburetor.
*1,130,915. Mar. 9, 1915. Mansbridge and Nash. Vaporizing attachment.
1,134,684. Apr. 6, 1915. Kramer. Internal-combustion engine.
*1,144,549. June 29, 1915. Kane. Carburetor fOl' internal-combustion engines.
1,146,435. July 13, 1915. McVickar. Internal-combustion engine.
1 ,147,193. July 20, 1915. Sheppard. Primer.
1,149,296. Aug. 10, 1915. Scott & Sherman. Charge-forming device for explosive engines.
1,149,321. Aug. 10, 1915. Baker. Method of and apparatus for delivering
liquid fuel to oil engines.
*1,149,597. Aug. 10, 1915. Riker. Regulating means for internal-combustion
engines.
1,159,985. Nov. 9, 1915. Orlopp. Fuel connection for internal-combustion
engines.
1,163,758. Dec. 14, 1915. Kahlenberg. Gas engine.
1,166,230. Dec. 28, 1915. Lemp. !<'uel pump.
1,168,421. Jan. 18, 1916. Riker. Controlling means for internal-combustiol'l
engine.
1,173,105. Feb. 22, 1916. Internal-combustion engine.
Re. 10,951. July 31, 1888. Delamarre-Debouttevell. Gas engine.
-Re. 11,775. Sept. 26, 1899. Pace. Combustion engine.

-~--.

REPORT NO. 11.
PART III.

NEW CLASSIFI CATI ON AND ASSIGNMENT OF
CARBURETORS.
By

CHARLES

E.

LUCKE.

( A) NEW CLASSIFICATION OF CARBURETORS OF THE PROPOR-

TIONING-FLOW TYPE ON A RATIONAL BASIS OF SIMILARITIES
AND DIfFERENCES, BOTH OF STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL
OP ERATIONS.

Those cases appearing in the four official lists o£ carburetor patents
that upon examination are found to be proportioning-flow carburetors are marked with an asterisk C'], and these are rearranged
here according to the new basis of classification, which provides 15
classes and 61 subclasses. The distinction between one class and another is indicated in Table I, which serves as a general guide to the
following list of definitions of the new general classes and the several
subclasses under each. In general the distinction between the classes
is based on the constancy or variability of the area of the fuel and
air tiow passages, with reference to flow rate. Any such passage
that does not automatically vary with tiow rate is regarded as fixed,
even though a manual adjustment is provided; in this case the area
is adjustably fixed . It is necessary for the condition of variable area
that the passage be provided with a regulating valve which graduates
the area with reference to tiow, and such a valve acting as, or connected to, a throttle, is regarded as automatic, as well as when independent of the throttle and actuated automatically by the flow itself.
TABLE

Class.

L-G'ltide to new cla.ssification of prop01·tioning-f/ow ca1·b7tretors.
Fuel inlet.

Subclasses.

Air inlet.

1 ..... . 1.1,1.2,1.3,104 . . . . .... FLxed, with periodic stop val"e .. . F ixed.
2 • . •• . .................. . . . . .. . Fixed from pump .. ......... . .... . Fixed, with air-motor driving
pump.
3.. .... 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 304, 3.5.... Single, fL"ed . .................... . Single, fLxed.
4 . . .. .. 4. l. . . ........ . ......... .. .. do .. . .. ..... . . . .... . .... . .... . Mul tiple, fLxed.
5 • .... . 5.1,5.2,5.3 . . .......... Multiple, fL"e<I. . ....... . ......... . Single, fixed.
6 ... . . . 6. 1,6.2, 6.3, 6.4,6.5,6.6 ...... do ..... . ...................... . Muftiple, fLxed.
7 • . . . .. 7.1,7.2,7.3,7.4,7.5 . .... Single, fixed . •.. ' " .... . •......... Single, variable with regulating
valve.
8 . .. ... 8. 1, 8.2,8.3,804,8.5, .6 ...... d? .. . .. ... . . ...... .. ........ . Mnltiple, variable wilh regulating
valve.
9.. . ... 9. 1,9.2,9.3,904,9.5 .. ... Multiple, fL"ed .......... . ........ . Single, variable with regulating
valve.
10 •• . ... lO.l, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, ..... do ... .. . ..................... . Multiple, variable with regulating
,-ralve.
10.5, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8.
SingIG, variable with regulating Single, fixed.
valve.
Multiple, fixed.
11 •• • ... ILl, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4... . . Mui~~ie;variabie·'\,iiIi·ieiUiaiirig · Single, fL,<ed.
valve .
. ... do .• .... ... ... . .... . .. . ....... Multiple, fL,<ed.

I

72805 °- S. Doc. 559, 64-2-- 10

145

146
TABLE

Class.

ABRON A UTICS.

I.-Guide to new cla8sijication of p1'oportioning-ftow carb1tretor s-Contd.
Subclasses.

.

Fuel inlet.

Air Inlet.

12 .•••.. 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, Single, variable with regulating Single, variable with regulating
valve.
valve.
12.5,12.6,12.7.
13 . . .. .. 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, .... . do ....................... ..... Multiple, variable with regulating
valve.
13.5, 13.6.

ringle, variable with regulating

Single, variable with regulating

valve.
valve.
14 ...... 14.1,14.2 ............. . Multiple, variable with regulating Multiple, ,ariable with regulating
valve.
valve.
15 ...... 15.1,15.2 ...... ........ Variable thermostatically. . . ..... Varia1.>le thermostatically, baro-

metrically.

PROPORTIONING FLOW CARBURETORS-NEW CLASSES AND
SUBCLASSES.
NEW CLASS l.-CARBURETORS, PROPORTIONI:XG FLOW, FIXED AIR AND FUEL
INLETS, PERIODIC FUEL VALVE.

Includes all cases of a single fuel inlet with a fuel valve opened
each suction stroke "\\ithout graduation of movement; single or
double air inlet with a similarly operated valve or no air valve at
all. Both the air and the fuel passages are of constant area when
open. Normally designed for pressure supplies of fuel and for
slow speed engines, more particularly those of the hit-and-miss
governed stationary type, but not to the exclusion of others. Fixed
area does not exclude manually adjusted air or fuel openings or the
valves to make I&uch adjustments because they do not change flow
area with flow rate.
New subclass 1.1-ilfechanicrilly operated fuel valve, single air
inlet.-The engine valve gear operates the fuel vah'e with, or without, an air inlet valve, in synchronism with the engine inlet valve, by
direct mechanical mo,ement or indirectly as, for example, by making electrical contacts to energize a solenoid.
New subclass DB-Single air inlet with automatic valve, fuel inlet
in seat.-Single air inlet fitted with an automatic ,alve clo ed by
gravity or a spring, and opened by the air flow or vacuum of disk,
s"\\ing or other type, lifting substantially the same amount and exposing the fuel inlet completely, each time it lifts. The vacuum beyond the air val,e has little or no influence on the fuel flow.
New subclass 1.S- Single air inlet automatic valve, fuel inlet beyond.-The lifting resistance of the automatic valve results in a
vacuum beyond it, which directly influences fuel flow.
New subclass l..4--Double air inlet, primary and secondary.-Air
enters at two points, the primary directly sweeping the point of
fuel inlet and exerting its velocity head influence on fuel flow, the
secondary entering elsewhere and normally through a manually adjustable opening.
New class ~-Carburetors proportioning flow, metering fuel pump,
air motor driven.-All types of air motor operated by the air that is
being drawn into the engine by its piston suction, driving directly a
fuel pump, when the air motor and the fuel pump are equivalent to
two volume meters, the former driving the latter. Excluding fuel
pumps operated by pressure pUlsations of the air as not essentially
related to the volume of air passing, and also all engine-driven fuel
pumps with air fans or compressors as not essentially proportioning.

AERONAUTICS.

147

New class 3-0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single
tixed fuel and air inlets.-All cases of fuel and air inlets not provided with graduating valves, but allowing manual adjustments,
where the fuel enters only because of a depression of air pressure
caused by the air flow as a result of the air velocity head, or of the
entrance resistance or both. Single inlet for air includes a series
of holes as equivalent to a slot when all the air flows and acts in the
same way. Fuel inlets are single even when branched or of several
orifices, if all are located in the same vacuum and act together. In
all cases" aspirating" implies that the fuel is taken from a cup
normally, but not always of constant level type, open to the atmosphere, the level in which is below that of the fuel inlet. The arrangement is always such that there is no fuel flow until the flow
of air causes a lowerinG' of pressure at the fuel outlet.
New subclass 3.l-Fuel inlet at air tM'oat.-Air passages more or
less regularly tapering toward a minimum area section or throat
and later expanding, of which the venturi tube is the type form,
and often called in the less perfect forms, "choke" or "strangle"
tubes, with the fuel inlet at or near the throat. Such passages may
be cur,ed as well as straight. Normally the reduction of pressure
inducing fu el flow is wholly due to air yelocity head, and not at all
to entrance resi tance, but not exclusively so.
New subclas8 3.2-Air guides 01' baffles.-After or during entrance.
the air is guided so as to sweep the point of fu el entrance to produce
an air velocity head vacuum effect on fuel flow, positively or negatiYely, if such positive action tends otherwise to become too vigorous.
New subclass 3.3-Rotating fuel spreader, air driven.-Movement
of the air causes an air motor, usually constructed like a fan to rotate,
and the fuel is discharged directly on the vanes or on a separate
plate driYen by them. The rotation may aid in fuel discharge by
centrifugal action, but the fuel flow is primarily due to the vacuum
at the outlet, otherwise th e case would come under class 2.
New subclass 3.4- Variable jet and throat relation.-Air passages
normally tapered to form a throat and the fuel inlet located at the
end of a nozzle. Either air throat or fuel nozzle may be fixed in
position while the other moves under t e influence of the air flow,
but without changing the flow area of either the air or the
fuel passage. The effect is to change the velocity head at the fuel
outlet with flow, usually automatically, from what it would be if
the fuel outlet remained at a fixed point "ith reference to the throat.
New subclass 3.5-Variable float cMmlJer preS8'1we.- Fuel is taken
from a closed cup or chamber, fitted with a valve, float, or diaphragm
controlled for level, but the pressure on the chamber, instead of
being constant atmospheric or otherwise, is varied, sometimes increased to induce a greater fuel flow, and sometimes decreased to reta.rd an excess fuel flow. In some ca ses a small air flow through
this chamber is used to secure the pressure control desired, but this
is not considered as air flow in the ordinary sense because the quanti ty is negligible.
New class 4- 0ar'buretors, proportioning flow aspiratitng, single
fuel, mUltiple air inlets, both fixed.-Two or more aiJr inlets, all
fixed or adjustably fixed in area, which can be grouped in two ways.
The first grouping is into prima,ry and secondary, the former in-

r--------------------------------------------------- - - -

148

AERONAUTICS.

eluding all air that sweeps the fuel inlet and adds by its velocity
head some vacuum to induce fuel flow to the entrance resistance of
both primary and secondary air; secondary air being that which enters
beyond or by-passes the f 11el inlet, and, therefore, has little or no
aspirating effect on the fuel by its velocity head. Cases of this sort
are classed here. The second grouping is into plain and mixed flow
air passages, each with its own inlet, and such cases are classed under
subclass 4.1.
1
New subclass 4.1-lIfixed flow .-Part of the air, usually a small
amount, enters the fuel passage, rrelieving the vacuum otherwise
acting on the fuel at that point and thereby affecting its flow. Beyond the point of air entrance into the fuel passage both this air
and the fuel move together to the fuel inlet constituting mixed flow .
This mixed-flow atr entrance may be active throu~h the whole range
of the carburetor-ftow rates or only during the high-flow rate
periods--i. e., continuous or intermittent.
New class 5-0arburet01>s, proportioning flow, aspirating, mu~tiple
fuel, siJngle air inlets, both fix~d'.-Fuel inlets are multiple when they
are differently situated for fuel flow at different heights abo,e the
level of the constant level chamber in regions of equal vacuum, or
at the same heights in regions of different yacuum, or both, regardless of the number of actual orifices. Being fixed, they are without
valves for glraduating or regulating flo", thongh stop ,alves may be
present, or manually adjusted yahes or periodic opening ,alves,
as in class 1. All the fuel inlets need not work continuou ly; some
may act intermittently at some particular flow rate.
Rew subclass 5.1- illain fuel inlet, with supplementary high-speed
jet.-One or more of the fuel inlets act throughout the whole range
of air flow or mixing-chamber vacuum, "hile another one or set of
fuel inlets will come into action "hcn the vacuum is high, due to
high rates of air flow, and is therefore intermittent.
New subclass 5.13-lffain fuel inlet, with supplementm"'Jj idlilng
jet.-The supplementary jet acts only when the throttle is closed and
is out of action wben the throttle is wiele open or the air-flow rate
high. The main fuel inlet acts throughout the entire range of am-flow rates excel t perhaps on closed throttle, when it may go out of
action, being replaced by the idlino- jet.
New subclass 5.3-Fuelstand'pipes.-A tube with holes at different
heights aboye the level in the constant level chamber serves as the
fuel inlet, or there may be separate tubes with outlets placed correspondingly. Inarease of vacuum in the mixing chamber, due to
increased air flow, causes the fuel to rise to successively new and high
orifices, the fuel flow increasing correspondingly.
New class 6-0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, multip~
fuel and multiple air inlets, both fixed.- fore than one fuel inlet,
differently situated for flow, and more than one air inlet also di fferent
in position or action, the several inlets acting continuously, or intermittently by succession or alternation.
New subclass 6.1-Double carburetor, progressive, by throttle.Two complete carburetors each with it own fixed fuel and air inlets,
one working throughout the whole range, the other being brought
into action by the throttle as it approaches full open positlOn .

•

AERON AUTICS .

149

New subclass 6.f2-M ultiple carbu1'etor, progres8ive, by throttl
More than two complete carbur etors, each with its own fixed fuel e.and
air inlets, one always in action and the others brough t in successively
as the throttl e is opened .
New subclass 6.3-Do uble carburetor, progressive, by vacuwm
Two complete carbur etors, as in class 6.1, but the second brough t .into
action by the vacuum acting on a piston, disk, or diaphr agm, when
the air flow in the fil'st becomes high enough to result in a vacuum
in
excess of a predet ermine d ,alue.
New subclass 6.4-M~lltiple carburetor, progressive, by vacwwm
More than two comple te carburetol's, each with its own fixed air .and
fuel inlets, one always in action and the others brough t in successively
by the Vl;lcunm.
New subclass 6.5-Mi med flow .-Par t of the air enters one or
of the fu el passag es thereby affecting the fuel flow. This mixed more
action may be continu ous or interm ittent and may affect all the flow
inlets or only one. ,Vhen interm ittent, the mixed flow may act on fuel
one
of the main fuel jets to modify its flow at high rates, or at low rates
due to closed throttl e may act as a jet, or both. Two fuel inlets,
side by side, are multip le when one dischar ges fuel only while
the
other dischar ges fuel and air, even though the jets are III the same
vacuum because this vacuum does not act equally in produc
ing
fuel flow in both.
New subclas8 6.6-F uel standp ipe.-M ultipl e orifices in a standpipe at differe nt levels, or multip le passages with outlets at differe
levels coming successively into action as the vacuum increases, nt
ceiving primar y air from one Or one set of air inlets, second ary reair
enterin g beyond from others.
New class 7-0arb uretor s, propor'tiomng flow, aspimt ing, single
fixed inlet and single air inlet w~th regulating valve. -A
inlet is associated with one air inlet provid ed with a valve forfixed fuel
gradua
ing the air-inle t area as flow changes, so that for any gi,en flow tthe vacuum acting on the fuel inlet and induci ng fuel flow is rate
not
the same as it would be with a fixed air inlet. The vacuum
fore, not merely' the result of a giyen rate of air flow, but is, theredepend
just as much, or more, on the air-inl et area as regula ted by the s
air
valve. This air valve may be actuate d in any way or be of any form,
each type combin ation constit uting a subclass. There may be
than one fuel inlet, but if all are so located as to work similarmore
to fuel flow versus ajr yacuum thev must be regard ed as a ly as
branch ed single inlet, even if supplIe d with differe nt fuels, so multifar as
propor tioning is concerned.
New subclass 7.1-Fu el inlet between throttle-controlled air valve
and throttle.-As the throttl e or mixtur e outlet valve is moved the
air-inl et valve moves with it, thereby control ling to some extent
vacuum bet"ee n them which acts on the fu el flow. The connec the
tion
may be by simple linkag e or by special cams to secure any desired
relativ e change in the areas of the air inlet and the throttl e outlet.
New subclass 7.~-Fuel inlet at or before air valve which
th1·ottle.-Pla cing the fuel inlet in the air entranc e, fuel acts as a
flow
induce d entirel y, or substa ntially so~ by the velocity head of the is
air,
and this velocit y head is reo-ulated t>y the air valve. In such cases
no separa te throttl e is necess ary; the ajr valve itself may be regard
ed
as the throttl e and called such instead of air valve.

150

AERONAUTICS.

New subclass ?'.3-Fuel inlet between ccutomatic air valve and
throttle.-Air enters through an automa.tic air valve of any form,
opened by the vacuum against a spring or gravity closing load, and
the vacuum which acts on the fuel inlet IS controlled by the size
form and loading of this automatic valve. The automatic air-inlet
valve may close the air entrance completely or there may be some
fixed air inlet nearby. 1£ the air from such fixed air inlet moves
with, the air from the automatic valve, the effect is substantially
the same as if all the air entered through the automatic valve, which
still is the controlling element in the fuel-flow vacuum. When part
of the air enters through a fixed and part through aTh automatic
val,ed inlet, one acting as primary and the other as secondary air,
the case falls under subclass 8.2.
New subclass ?'.4-Fuel inlet swept by air entering tlwough automatic ai1' valve.-This subclass differs from the last in the position
of the fuel inlet "ith relation to the air inlet. Here the fuel inlet
is so located as to be directly swept by the entering air, fuel fl..ow
being largely dependent on the air-velocity head. Normally the
automatic air valves of this subclass are but lightly loaded or the
lead does not increase fast enough with flow, and there is insufficient
air-entrance resistance to alone produce the vacuum required to
draw enough fuel. The automatic valve need not completely close
the air inlet ; there may be fixed air inlets nearby' but no combination that could be regarded as divisible into primary and secondary
air is permissible in the subclass.
New subclass 7.b-Variable float chamber pressure.-Fuel 1S taken
from a closed chamber fitted with a level control vah'e, but the pressure in the chamber is varied by connection to the carburetor interior
to control the flow of fuel from the single fixed inlet, in addition to
such control as might be available with the variable air inlet. A
small air flow through the float chamber used solely to secure the
desired pressure on the surface of the fuel is not regarded as air flow
in the general sense.
New class 8- 0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating single
fixed fuel inlet, multiple air inlets, valved for 1'egulation.-The air
enters at more than one point, the entrance locations being such that
their aid does not act the same in inducing fuel flow . The difference
may be that corresponding to primary versus secondary air or main
versus mixed-flow air. At least one of the air inlets has a regulating
valve operated automatically or by the throttle, and the others may
be fixed or themselves fitted with regUlating valves.
New subclass 8.l-Two air inlets, fixed primary, throttle controlled
secondary regulating ai1' valve.-A fixed air passage carries a fixed
fuel jet and beyond it secondary air is admitted through a port controlled directly by the throttle itself or by a separate valve linked to
the throttle. The secondary air may enter at all throttle positions or
be cut off when throttle is nearly closed.
New subclass 8$-Two air inlets, fixed ]J1'imary, automatic secondary regulating air valve.-To the mixture formed from the fixed
fuel and primary air inlets secondary air is added throuO"h an automatic valve, which opens when the vacuum exceeds its ciosing load.
The automatic valve need not completely close the secondary air
inlet. T here may be fixed inlets near by, but it does control the final

AERONAUTICS.

151

vacuum and total amount after it opens. Similarly the primary air
may leave more than one orifice.
New subclass 8.3- Two air iJnlets, both with regulating valves, one
automatic, the other throttle controlled.-Primary air may enter
through the automatic and the secondary air through the throttle
controlled valve or vice versa. As in other cases, the regulating ail'
valve need not completely close the air inlet it controls, and may be
of multi orifice form.
New subclass 8.4-Two air inlets, both with automatic-regulating
valves.-Both primary and secondary air enter through automatic
valves, which may be entirely separate and similar or different in
form, size, or loading, or there may be one ordinary automatic valve,
with a linkage connection controlling another valve entirely different. In all cases it is the vacuum that controls not only the whole
air but the relative amounts of primary and secondary, either directly or indirectly automatically and independent of the throttle.
New subclass 8.S-Two air inlets, botlL with throttle-controlled
"egulating valves.-There may be three valves, two for air inlet and
a third acting as throttle, or only two, the two air inlets moving together and acting as throttle; but in both cases the primary and
secondary air are controlled in ratio as well as total quantity by
mechanically operated valves acting as throttle or connected to it.
New subclass 8.6- Mimed ftow.-Part of the air enters the fuel
passage, affecting the fuel flow and emerging with the fuel from the
fuel inlet either continuously or intermittently. The other air
stream, or main air, may enter in any of the ways appropriate to
the class, through one or more inlets with regulating valves. N 01'mally the mixed-flow air inlet has no vahe except as a liquid seal
may act as a stop valve, but a regulating valve may be added.
New class 9- 0 arburetors ~ proportioning ftow, aspirating, multiple
fixed fuel inlets, single air inlet with regulating valve.-A series of
fuel inlets without regulating valves are so disposed as to be acted
upon differently by the air which enters through a single valve regulatin~ the air-inlet area. The fuel inlets may be located in the same
positIOn or vacuum region and arranged to be brought into action
successively as the air-inlet area increases, or they may be arranged
at different levels in the same chamber, to be brought into action as
the vacuum causes the level to rise, or they may be located in different
places in the chamber where the vacuum is different.
N ew subclas,~ 9.1-Fuel inlets act progressively with opening of
single automatic air-inlet regulaiing valve.-Air enters through a
port controlled by an automatic valve, spring or gravity loaded, usually the former, and opened by the vacuum. As the effective size of
the air inlet increases, the fuel inlets are brought into action successively as the air sweeps past an increasing number. Fuel flow is
induced primarily by the air-velocity head past each fuel inlet in
turn , though not exclusively so, and the fuel inlets are located at or
before the air inlet.
New subclass 9.~-Fuel inlets act progressively with opening of
single th.rottle-controlled air-inlet regulating valve, or air valve acting as th,1·ottle.-Instead of moving automatically, as in the last subclass, the air valve is here controlled by the throttle or is itself the
throttle, otherwise there is no difference.

152

AERON A UTICS.

New subclass 9.3-Fuel standpipe.-Single tubes with holes, or a
series of tubes with outlets, successively higher, arranged in a chamber supplied with air from an air inlet having a regulating valve,
either automatic or throttle controlled.
New subclass 9.4-Two fuel inlets, one main and one idling.-A
main fixed fuel inlet is disposed between the automatic valved air
inlet and the throttle l with a supplementary fuel inlet located so as
to be brought into action when the throttle is closed, or nearly so.
Two fuel inlets may be similarly arranged for the main and supplemental low speed or idling action, associated with an air-inlet regulating valve, throttle controlled, or acting as throttle, in which case
one or both of the fuel inlets may be at or in front of the air.
New subclass 9.5-Tilting fuel chamber, radially disposed fuel
inlets.-Either the float chamber itself or a supplemental chamber
connected with it, in which the fuel level is under control, lies
wholly within the air passage, and arranged to be tilted or partially
rotated so as to bring into action successively a series of fuel inlets
disposed about its axis. The tilting is accomplished by a connection
with the throttle, and the chamber itself may act as air-regulating
valve, or as both throttle and air valve.
New class lO-Cm'bttretors, proportioning flow, aspirating, multiple fixed fuel inlets with air inlets, valved for regulation.-Multiple,
applied as ter, to fuel inlets implies that the several inlets shall be
at least in part subjected to different fuel flow conditions, and either
regularly, intermittently, or successively have imposed upon them more
or less different conditions; mere multiplicity of orifices is not intended. The term multiple applied to air inlets has a similar significance, the several air inlets either"act differently at the same time,
or act in succession or alternately. At least one of the air inlets has
a regulating inlet valve, controlled by the throttle or acting as
throttle, or automatic, and all the inlets may be similarly valved.
New subclass lO.l-lIlain fuel inlet, with ~upplementary highspeed jet.-Two fuel inlets, both fixed, one the main or low-speed jet,
acting constantly, and the other a supplementary or high-speed jet,
brought into action at high-flow rates by the vacuum, by the opening
of a secondary automatic air valve. Normally the main jet is located
in a fixed air inlet and there is an automatic secondary air valve,
through other air-inlet arrangements are included, provided one at
. least has a regulating valve.
New subclass lO.~-jllain fuel inlet, with supplementary idling
jet.-Two fuel inlets, both fixed, one the main or high-speed jet acting
constantly except perhaps at low rates or closed throttle, the other a
supplementary idling jet brought into action by the throttle in its
closed or nearly closed position and normally replacing the main
jets for low-flow rates. In all ca es there is more than one air inlet
and at least one of them has an automatic regulating valve; the normal case is that of one fixed primary or main air and an automatic
secondary.
N ew subclass lO.3-11fultiple carbureto1', progressive, by throttle,
with individual automatic air-inlet regulating valves.-Two or more
fixed fuel inlets, each located in a separate air passage, supplied
through an automatic air-inlet valve, brought into action in succession by the throttle. The automatic air-inlet valves mayor may not

AERONAUTICS.

153

completely close the air inlets, but e,en if there are near by fixed air
inlets, the automatic valves control the air flow and the vacuum at
the fuel outlet when they open. There may be a secondary air inlet
for each jet or a common one for all or none at all.
N ew subclass 10·4.- Multiple carburetor, progressive, by vacuwm,
with individual auto11UJ,tic air-inlet regulating valves.- This subclass
is similar to the last, except that the progressive acting of the several similar members is controlled by an automatic valve, vacuum
moved, at their outlets. <
New subcZass 10.5- Fuel standpipe.- Fuel rises with increase of
vacuum successively higher outlets in a single standpipe or in
separate tubes, located in a fixed primary air passage, secondary air
entering through an automatic valve in a separate air-inlet passage.
New sttbclassl0.6-Mixed flow.- Part of the air enters one or more
of the fuel passages affecting the fuel flow in it and making it a
mixed flow passage, either steadily or intermittently, the fuel likewise
flowing from its several inlets either steadily or intermittently.
When the action of the air into a mixed flow passage, or that of the
fuel through an inlet, is intermittent, this may be due to throttle
position or to vacuum or both.
New class 11-0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single
Or multiple f uel inlets with regUlating valves, single or multiple fixed
air inlet.-Fixed air inlets are associated with fuel inlets provided
with fuel-regulating valves in any number, from one fixed air and
one regulated variable fuel upward. The fuel-regulating valve may
be actuated by a throttle connection or by the vacuum or by the air
flow directly.
New subclass li.i-Single fuel-inlet valve, throttle controlled.To a fixed air passage the single fuel inlet is connected in any of the
ways already classified for fixed fuel inlets, but here the fuel inlet
is provided with a regulating valve connected to and moving with
the throttle, so that fuel flow no longer varies primarily as a result
of a change in the air vacuum, but also directly as a result of the
area made available for its flow by the fuel-regulating valve. A
secondary fixed air passage may be present.
New subclass 11.~-Sing le fu el inlet, independently controlled by
air flow O'f' vacuum.-One fuel inlet with a graduating valve directly
actuated by the vacuum or by the air flow acting by impact on a
moving m ember or lifting a flow valve, without affecting the air
inlet area up to the point of fuel inlet. There may be a fixed secondary air passage.
New subclass 11.3-Mixed flow.- One or more fuel inlets, at least
one with a fuel regulating valve actuated in any way. Two or more
air inlets, at least one of which enters the fuel passage affecting its
{{ow and making it from that point on a mixed flow passage.
New class l~-Oarburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single
fuel and air inlets, both 1IJith regulating valves.- Regulating valves
are provided to control the areas of both the single air and fuel.
inlets, so proportionality becomes as much a matter of the relative
areas of two variable inlets as of the vacuum at the fuel inlet that
results from the air flow .
New subclass 1~.1-Valved fuel inlet beyond air inlet valve acting
as throttle, fuel valve controlled by ai?' valve.-A direct connection

154

AERONAUTICS.

between the fuel and the air inlet valve controls the total quantity
of air and fuel and the ratio by inlet areas alone. The fuel inlet is
in a region where the vacuum is that due to the air flow through
the restricted valved inlet.
New subclass l B.B- Valved fuel inlet between air inlet valve and
throttle, both fuel and air valves controlled by the throttle.-By
u;;ing a throttle in addition to an air valve the vaccum between them
is under control, and by it the fuel flow also, independent of such
fuel flow control as r esults directly from the fuel l'egulating valve
linked to both throttle and air valve.
N ew subclass 113.3- Valved fuel inlet, at or in front of air valve
actin,c! as throttle, fuel valve cont1'olled by air valve.-Locating the
fuel inlet at, or in front of the air valve opening r elieves it of the
vacuum beyond, and the fuel flow is normally though not exclusiycly
the result of air velocity head at the entrance, the fuel area being
graduated to correct excesses or deficiencies of fuel flow otherwise
present.
New subclass 1~.4- Valved fuel inlet between automatic air inlet
valve and throttle, fuel valve controlled by throttle.-Air entrance
through an automatic valve results in a limited variation of vacuum
at the point of fuel inlet affecting fuel flow, which is also subject
to the variations of fuel inlet area resulting from the control of the
fuel valve by the throttle. The aut omatic air inlet val,e mayor
may not close the inlet completely, but it controls the air flow and
vacuum even if some fixed air inlets are located nearby.
New subclass lB.5- Valved fuel inlet between automatic air-inlet
valve and throttle, fuel valve controlled by automatic air valve.-As
in the last case the fuel inlet is subjected to the entrance resistance
of the air passing the automatic valve and the fuel flow is the result,
partly of this and partly of the change in the fuel inlet area as regulated by the fuel valve which is here actuated by automatic valve.
Normally both air and fuel are primarily controlled in quantity and
proportion by the two relative and connected valved openin~s rather
than by any material vacuum change, though not exclusivelY. The
automatic air valve need not completely close the air inlet.
N ew subclass 1~.6- Valved fuel inlet, between air inlet valve and
throttle, fuel valve vontrolled independently by vacuum or air flow.The air inlet valve may be either sort, automatic or mechanically
connected to throttle, but the fuel valve is controlled independently
of the air valve or throttle, by the vacuum directly, or by flow valves
beyond it, or by air impact on moving members.
New subclass 1~. 7- Va?'iable float chamber pressure.-In addition
to the use of a fuel inlet with a regulating val,e associated with an
air inlet similarly provided with a regulating valve, fuel flow is subjected to the further control of the pressure in a closed float chamber
which is varied by a connection to the vacuum chamber of the carburetor. Any air that flows through the float chamber as part of
the means of pressure control on the fuel surface is disregarded.
New class 13- 0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single
fuel and multiple air inlets, both with regulating valves.-Normally,
two air inlets, one primary and the other secondary, are associated
with a single fuel inlet having a regulating valve, but there may be
more air inlets.

AERONAUTICS.

155

New subclass 13.1-Valved fuel inlet, fixed prilmary air, fixed or
'valved secondary air inlet, th?'ottle control of fuel-inlet valve and of
secondary air vaZve.-The changes in vacuum at the fuel inlet supplied with primary air from the fixed air inlet, even as modified by
a fixed or throttle-controlled secondary air, are not relied upon to
control fuel flow, but a fuel-regulating valve actuated by the throttle
is added.
New subclass 13/2-Valved fuel inlet, valved primary and second·
ary air inlets, throttle control of both air inlets arnd fuel-inlet valve.Variation of two air-inlet areas and the fuel-inlet area with the
throttle subjects both air and fuel flow to the control of mechanically
related inlet and throttle outlet areas, and the vacuum at the fuel
outlet still remains as a factor.
New subclass 13.3-Valved fuel inlet, fixed primary and throttle·
controlled secondary air inlets, fuel valve controlled by the vax]'lJIum
or air flow indepeiuiently.-Fuel-inlet area is dependent upon the
vacuum or air-flow conditions independent of the throttle or of the
throttle-controlled secondary air.
New subclass 13.4-V al ed fuel inlet, fixed primary and automatio
valved secondary air inlets, fuel valve controlled. by tlte throttle.Fuel-inlet area is dependent upon the mixture-outlet area by the
throttle connection and is independent of the air-inlet areas, the
vacuum at the fuel inlet being, however, directly dependent on the
air inlets.
New subcla:.ss 13.5-Valved fuel inlet, fixed primary and aJUtomaf;ia
valved secondary air inlets, fuel valve controlled by the automatic
secondm'y air valve.-The throttle is independent. Fuel-inlet area
is related to the movement or entrance area of the automatic secondary valve.
New subclass 13.6-Valved fuel inlet, valved primary and secondary
air, both automatic, fuel valve controlled by one 01' both automatic
air-inlet valves.-The two air-inlet automatic valves may be independent or consist of two ports controlled by one valve, and the
inlets need not be completely closed by the automatic valves so long
as they control the flow and the resulting vacuum.
New class 14-0arburetors, propo1,tioning flow, aspirating, multiple fuel and air inlets, both with regulating valves.-Two or more
fuel inlets each differently situated or different in action are associated with two or more fuel inlets each acting differently with
respect to flow, and at least one of the fuel and one of the ail' inlets is
provided with a regulating valve, though all may be so equipped.
New subclass 14.1-Two fuel inlets, one fixed main and one valved
supplementary high-speed jet, two air inlets, one fixed p1..'imary and
one valved secondary.-A two-jet type of carburetor, the second or
high-speed jet coming into action with the opening of the secondary
air valve automatically or brought in by the vacuum due to highflow rates. However brought in, the high-speed jet is provided with
a regulating valve.
New subclass 14.~-Multiple carburetors, progressive by throttle
or vacuum.-Two or more complete carburetors, each with its own
fuel and air inlet, both with regulating valves, and brought successively into action by either the throttle or the vacuum. There may .be
a common secondary air inlet at their outlets, throttle controlled or
automatic.

156

AERON AUTICS.

N ew classi5-0arb1wetors, proportioning (low, aspirating, the1'7lWstatic or barometric control.-Density corrections for air or fuel, and
for viscosity of fuel to compensate for changes in temp'erature of
either, or changes in absolute pressure of the former, by actuating
their inlet valves or by r estoring the original value of the variable.
New sUbclass i 5.i-Thermostatic controls.-Automatic means of
keeping a constant temperature of air or fuel or both or of actuating
the r egulating valves to compensate for temperature changes.
New subclass i 5.2-Baromet1"ic controls.-Automatic means of
keeping the absolute pressure of the air supply constant or of actuating the air-inlet valves to compensate for variations.
(B) Assignment to the new classes and subclasses of all United States
patents for "proportioning-flow" type carburetors found in the
official lists of Part n (A), (B), (C) and (D), constitnting a new list
of all United States patents containing proportioning-flow carburetors
arranged according to the new classification.
Uni t ed States patents.
P resent officialPatent No.
Class.
New class 1. carburetors. p roportioning·flow tL"ed air and
fuel inlets, periodic fuel
v alve:

4

~r:m::::::::::: : :::::: ::

532.314... . ... . . . . . ... . . . . .

534.354 . .. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
556.069. . . . . .. ... ... . .. ....
565.033... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
566. 125.. . " ... , . . . . . . . . . . .
578.034 . .. , . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
581.930. ........ ... .. .. .. ..
584.666.. •••• .. • . . .. . . . . . . .
587.627.. • .. . ... . . ..... .. ..
598.832. . . . . . . . . • . • . . . . . . . .
599.375. . . .. .. ... . ...... .. .
599.376.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .
608.968.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
611.341.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1~

123

630.048. . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .
649.191.. .. . . . ... .. . . ... . ..

657.140. . .. ........ . . .. . . ..

658.127.... .... . .. ... . . . . ..
658.367. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ..
608.953 .. .• . " . . . . . . . • . . .. .
670.921.. . .... .. . . .. .. .....

Subclass.

~~g

28

C. R. 2 ... . .. . . . .
48
123
123
123

154. 1
35

35
35

4~
155
C. R. 2 .. . ...... .
C. R. .... ' 1 .. .
'29'
123
C. R. 2
123
112
C. R. 2 .. ... ... . .
48
134. 1

~~:~:: ::: :: :: ::::: : ::: : : c.J~

632,859 ... , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
635,298 .•. .... . • . . . . .. . . ... {

P resent o1llciaJPatent No.

123

C. R.

51
~J
133
C. R . 2 .... ' 1 ..' 1
'54' '
48

C. R.
C. R. 2
C. R. 2 . ..• .. is' .
261
48

~:ML~ ::: : : : ::: ::::::: c. J~

154.1

Class.
New class 1. carb uretors, proportioning·f1ow fixed rur a nd
fuel inlets, periodiC luel
valve-Con tinued.
747.235 .......... .. . .. ... . .
74 .990 . .. . . ... .. ... . . ... . .
756. 79 ..... . . .. . . ... . . . . . .
700.333 . . ... .. . . .... .... .. .
700.673 .•....... .. ....... ..
761.192 .•.. ....... . . . ... ...
761.392.. .. . ... . . . . . ... . .. .
778. 154 . . . . .. ... . ... . ... . . .
778.988 .. . . . ... . .. .. ... . . "
791.192 .......... . .. . .... . .
793.498 . . . .... .. . ... . ... .. .
79-1 .192 . .. .. . . . .•... .. ..• ..

806.079 . . ..... ... . .. ... . .. .
811.397 . . .............. . . . .
817.051. ...... . ... . ... .. . . .
820.408 . ... . ..••... . .......

826. 787. .... . .... . . ....... .
842.429 .... . . .. .. . . ...... . .
850. 223 ....... . •.. ... .. . ...
860.630 ..... .. ....... . . . . . .
863.516 . . ..... . .... . ... . .. .
866.002 ....... . ... . ... .. .. .

868.265 . . .... . ... . .. .. ... . .
871.288 .. .. ... ... .. . . • . . ...
878.824. .. ... . . . . ... . ..... .
890.099 .•....•......... . ...

891.322............ . .. . ... .
911.967 . . . . . . .......... . .. .

915.684 .. . .. . .. . ........ .. .

688.367.. . • . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . .
692.444. . . . • •. • . . • • • . . . . .. .
696.231.. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
703.937. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
705.314.. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .
705.021.. .• . . . .•. . . . . . . . . . .
722.672 ... . , . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .
706.050.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48
261
48
48
48
48
123
48

119
154. 1
67
148
154. 1
155
148
123
155

~~a~L : : :::: :::::::: : ::

~

~tU

:8

i~U

1.004.091. ..•.. .. ... . ..•..•

154. 1

1.021.326 •• •..•..•...... .. .

725. 191.... . . . ... . . . . ... ...

~~;~:::: :::: :: ::: : :::: ::

730.608. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
741 .959. . . ......... . .... . ..

123 /
48
48

35

154. 1

Subclass.

930.483 ...... . ........... . .
944. 11. • • . .• • • • • •. ••• . ... .
955. 222•..... . ..... . . . .. .. .

973.882 ....... . . . ...... . . . .
974.033 ... .. ... . .. . • ...... .
975.696 . . . ........ .. ... .. . .
976.409 . . . . . . • .. .... . ••.. ..
978.076 . ............ . .. . '"
994.886 . . ... . ...... ... .. .. .

979.409 . .. . .•.. . ...... .. ...

~::~:::::::::: :: : : : : ::::

1.007.659 . . . ... •... ... . . . ..
1.009.2.'2 •. .. . .. . .... . . .. . .

48
123
48

C.R. 2
48

48
48
C.R.2
48
48
48
123
48
261
261
48
48
48
48
123

154. 1
129
150. 1
154. 1
155
154. 1
148

154. 1
155
123
154. 1
62
12
154. 1
154. 1

154. 1
154. 1
. 35

C. R .
C. R. 2
48
48
48
48

155. 2
150. 1

155

154 . 1

48

150. 2

48
48
C. R.

154. 1
154. 1

48

48

48

154 .1
154. 1

48

154. 1
154. 1

48

:~
48

155. 1
154. 1

48

154. 1

48

154.1

C. R.

m:i

C· :~I·····HH1
48
154.

157

AERONAUTICS.

United States patents- Continued.
P resent official-

P r esent officialP atent N o.

P a tent No.
Class.
N ew class 1, carburetors, pro·
~rtiOning.no w fixed air a n d
u ol Inlets, pcriodic fuel
valvo-Continued.
1,029,606 .. ...... . . . .......
1,044,314 . .. ... . . . . . .....•.
1,049,318 .. ................
1,063,866 . . .... .. •• • •• .....
1,111,179 .... .. .... .... .. ..
1,120,397 . .. . ........... . ..
1,124 ,911 ... . ... . . . .•......

u~~r~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~: ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

1,146, 181. . ...... . .. . ..... .
1,151,156 .. ...... . . . .. .....
1,172,25 .. ...... . .........
N ew class 1.1, m eChani C81l
operated fuel valve, sing e
ai r in let:
433,606 .. . . . . . .... . . .. . ....
433,807...... . .. ...... . . . . .
437,507....... .... ........ .
456,284.... ................
482,202.. .. ....... . ........
525,857 ...... ..............
537,370.. ... ..... .. .. .. ....
550,451. .... ...............
573,762 .......... .. . . . .....
574,183 .... .. . . . . . .........
585,115 .. ..................
596,809 .. ....... . .. . .. .... . {
527,887.. ..... ......... .. ..
658,594,. . . ............ .. . .
659,095 .. . . ..... . . . . . .. ....
679,053 ... .. ...... . ....... .
690,4 I ... .... ... ....... . . .
728,873 .. . ....... . ..... . .. .
740,571. .. .... ... .. .. ......
751,292 .. ................ ..
788,74 . ....... . . ... . . .... .
792, 94 .. .. .............. . .
806,822 . .. ... .••• •• . • . .... .
846,434. .. .................
857,111. .. .... ...... . ......
858,046 .. . ..... .. .. .. .. ....
885,598.... . .... .. .... .... .
924,483 ... . .... .. . .. .. .. ...
951,353 .. ..................
N ew class 1. 2, single a ir inlet
w ith automatic valve, fuel
inlet in seat :
417,924 .. ..... .... . .... . .. .
418,029 . ... . .. . .. ... . .. ... .
523,511. ... . .. .... .... . ....
532,100 .. . . .. ...... ... .... .
639,710 .. . . ...... . ... . .. ...
555,717 .. .. . . . .. .... . ... . . .
563,541..... . . . ... .. . ......
593,043 .. . .. .. .. . . . . . . .....
593,911 .. . . .. . ........ ... ..
598,986 .. .. . .... .... . ... . ..
600,14 7.... .. . .. ...... . ....
603,986 . ........ ...... . .. ..
627,219 .. .. .. .. .. ........ . .
635,166 .. .... . .. .. . . . . . .. ..
645,044 ..... ... . ... ... .. ...
683,110 ... .. .... .. ........ .
690,112.. .. ....... . .. . .. ...
700,295 .... . ...... ....... ..
719,536 .. .. .... . .... . .. ....
722,357.. ...... .. : .. ... ....
729,377 .. .. .... . ...... .. . ..
731,218.... . .. .. .. ...... . ..
755,093 .. . .. ...... ... .. ....
782,471. .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ...
806,139 .. . .... .. ......... ..

·
1

48
48
48

154 . 1
154. 1
154. 1

:~

154. 1
154. 1
154. 1
154 . 1
154. 1
154. 1
154. 1
154 . 1
123
154 . 1

C . R.

48

:~

48

:~

123
48

C. R . 2
C. R .
123
C. R. 2
C. R. 2
C. R. 2
C. R. 2
C. R . 2
123
123
C. R.
123
123
C.R .
123
123
123
C. R . 2
123

C' ~8

123
123
123
C. R. 2
48
123
123
C. R.2
123

C. R. 2
123
C. R. 2
C. R . 2
C. R. 2
C. R.
C. R,
C. R, 2
48
123
C. R, 2
C. R, 2
C. R,4~
C. R,
48
48
123
48
48

1~
123
123
C. R . 2

Class.

Subclass.
N ew class 1.2, single a ir irilet
with automatic valve, fuel
inlet in seat--Con tinued.
817,721.. ....... . .. .. . .... .
819,239 .. .. . ... .. ........ . .

48
123
C. R. 2
48
866,490 .•.•. . . •. •• . •.... . ..
868,392 ........ . . ......... .
123
874,822..... . ........... . .. C. R. 2
123
877,753 .. ........... .. ... . .
48
894,656 .. .. .. ........... ...
48
913,313.. .. . ........... .. ..
922,374.. .. ................
48
C. R.
922,383 .. . ..... ... .. . ......
48
94 ,977 .. ... .. .. ........ .. . .
123
955,218 .. . . . ... ......... .. .
123
970,251. .. .... ...... .... .. . {
261
48
973 ,055 ... . .......... . . . ...
48
97 ,77 .................. ..
995,919 ...... .. .. . ... .. .. .. {
48
1 ,0~6 , 14 1 . .. ... .. ...... . ...
48

856,760 .. ..................

:~

35

122
121
122
123
121
123
121
35
150.2
123
121
119
168
133
123
35

129

155
34

h~~ d~5lio'.-.-.- ::::::: : ::: : :

1,067,351. .......... . .... ..
1,086,359 . .. ............ ...
1,095,622 . ......... .. .. ....
1,101,147 ............... .. .
1,155,836 . . .............. ..
New class 1.3, s ingle air in let
automatic valve, fuel inlet
beyond :
448,386 .............. .. . . ..
498,4·17 .. ................ ..
500,401. ............ .... .. .
509, 28 ...... . . . ...... . . . ..
515,050 .. . ... . ... . .. .. .....
552,263 .. ... . . .. . ..........
557,253 ......... . ....... ...
578,683 .. . ........... ... ...
588,466.. . . ... . . .. . . .. . ....
593,91 1.. ......... . . . .. .. ..
609,55; ...... .. .. . .... . . . _.
616,974 ......... . ... . ......
632,917.. . .................
633,800 .. .. . .... .. .... . ....
638,529 ................ .. ..
665,496 .... .. . . . . . . .. . .... .

671 ,743 ......... .. .. .. .....
619,776 ...... . .......... . ..
676,285 .. .. . . . .... .. . . .....
680,572 ............... . ....
680,961. ..... . .... .. . . . . ...
681,287 ..... .. ............ .
694,708 .. ... . ............. .
709,126 .... .. ........ . .... .
709,42 ..... . ...... . . . . . .. .
710,84 1. ......... .. . . ... ...
746,701. .. ..... . .... ... .. . .
755,908 .. ..................
799,791.. .. . .. .............
806,125 ....................
835,564 . . .. .... . . ... . ......
837,984 .... .. ........ . .. ...
863 ,516 . ........... . . ... .. .

155.1
168
154 . 1
35
155. 1
154. 1
123
154 . 1
141
123

882,023 .............. . .....
892,501. .. . ... . ............
904,508 .. . .. .. . . .. . .. ... . ..
912,998 . •......•....•.... . .
912,999 .. . .......... .. ... . .
930,443 . ................. . .
938,89-1 .. . .. ...... . . . ......
952,54 7.... . .... . ....... .. .
963,804 ................. .. .
964,4("' ...... ... .......... .
964,8:. .... .. .... .... .. .. ..

~~~80:i : ::: : ::::::: :::: : :

48
48

:~

48

C. R. 2
48
48
48
48
123
48
48
123
C.R.
48
48
C. R.2
48
48
48
123
C. R. 2
123
48
C. R.
C. R. 2
48
123
123
C.R,
C. R.2
48
48
C. R,
48
48

:~

C. R, 2
C. R.
48
48
48
48
48
48
C.R,
48
48
C. R . 2

Subclass.

155
25
154.1
129
129
150. 2
154 .1
154.1
154.1
123
141
50
155. 2
154. 1
150.2
155.2
154. 1
150. 3
154. 1
154. 1
150. 1
150. 1
148

154 . 1
154. 1
154 . 1
104. 1
123
154. 1
154.1
122
154.1
150. 2
154. 1
148
148
132

· .... iii ..
154 .1
154.1
123
136
151.1
155. 2
155.2
168
154. 1
155. 2
154. 1
154. 1
154. 1
154 .1
150. 2
154. 1
151. 1
154.1

----------------------------

158

--- ----- -------~---------------,

AERON AUTICS.

Unitecl States patents--Continued.
Present oflicialClass.
New class 1.3, single air inlet automatic valve, fuel
inlet beyond-Continued.
1,061,582 . ..... . . . ...... .. .
1,063,630 . .......... .. .. . . .
1,066,080 .............. ... .
1,111,897 ... .... ....... .. . .
1,137,727 .. . . . ........ ... . .
New c lass 1.4, d ouble air in-

le~18~~~~. ~~ ~~~~~:: .

679,387 . . ... . . .. . ...... .. . .
715,39 .. .. .. . ... . ....... . .
717,000 .... . . . . . .. . ... ... . .
726, 191. . ....... _......... .
726,671. . ....... . .. . ...... .
741,224 . . ....... .. . . . .. ... .
BOO,777 .. .. . •.•••.•••• . .. .•
,263 .... ..... . ......... .

11m~~ ~ ~: ~. ~ ~: .::::' ~ ~.

1,178,530 . . . . ........... . . .
1,181,514 .. . . . ... . .... . .. . .
New class 2, carbureto"" proKortioning flow, metering

U~~~,3~~,.~r. ~~~~~ ~.".i~~.~:.

~~~:~~:::::: :: : ::: : :::::: :
1,048,0<>.3 .. _. _.. .. .... . .. . .
1,119,479 . . ...... . ..... _. . .
1,127,120 ........ .. ... . . . . .
1,137,23 .. . ..... .. ..... . . .
1,149,323 . . ..•... . . .. . .....

1,150,ll5 . . . . . . .. . .... . ... .
1,153,077 . .. _. . .... . . ..... .
New class 3, carburetors, l?roportioning flow, aspiratIDg,
single fixed fuel and 81I
inlets:
439,313.... . . ...... ... .... .
477,295 ..... •.•.•• . •.... . •.
542,043 . .... . . . . .. . .. ... .. .

~~:m:::: ::: : :::: :: ::::::

627, ·7 ....... .... ........ .
633,274 ....... . . . .. . ...... .
634,242 . . _. . ...... . .. . .... .

m~ijL ~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~: ~ ~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

658,267 . . . ....... . . . ...... .
670,803.... . ...... . .. .. . .. .

m:~:

702,469 ....... .. . . ..... . . .

~g~:~~::: :::: ::: ::::: ::::

706,494 .. _.... ... .. . . .. .. _
711 ,005 . .. . . .. . ... .. .... . .
721,238 ....... .... . . . ... . .
724,648 . ... . .. .. . . . ...... .

~~:6~:: :: : :::: ::::::::: :

737,848 ............... ... .
772,530 ..... . . . .. .... . •...
781,936 .... .. . ........ . .. .
790,379 .... .. . ....... . ... .

Present officialpatent No.

Patent No.

48
48
48
C.R.
48

154.1
154. 1
154. 1
154.1

C. R. 2

:~

48
48
C. R.
48
48
43
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

:~

48
48
48
48
4R
48
48
48

C.R .
C. R.
C. R.
C.R.
C. R .
C. R .
123
48
C. R.2
C. R.2
48
123
123
C. R. 2
123
48
C. R.2
48
C.R.
43
48

C.R.
48
C. R.
48
C. R.
48
48
48
48
C. R.
48
C.R.
48
123

Class.

Subclass.

154. 1
1M. 1
154 .1
155
154.1
148
154. 1
154. 1
154. 1
155.2
154. 1
154. 1
148
155.1

153
155. 1
155.1
154. 1
152
155
155. 1
152
148
152

New class 3, carburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating,
single fixed fuel and air
inlets-Continued.
804,589 ...... . ........ ... .
812,371. ... _.. ...... . •....

~~: :~:: ::::: ::::::: : ::::

846,903 . ... _.........••.. .
840,0-1 .•.. _••...... . .....

~:~~ ::::::: ::::::::::::

807,804 .... ..... . ... •.....
872,336 . . .... .... .. . .. .. . .
801,064 .. •• •.. •..•.•.• ....

915,647 .. .... . . ... ........
917,283 .. ..... . . . . ..• . ... .
936,337 .... _ . .. . . ... .. . ...

g~;:~gA: ::::::::::::::::::

1,006,033 ........... .. ... . .
1,008,155 .. .... . . ...• •.....
1,013,759 .. ....... . . . ......
1,026,49 1. .......... . . ... ..
1,0 1,900 ....... . . . .......
1,084,151. . . ......... .... ..
1,103,451. .....•...........
1,105,017 .....•............
1,109,025 ......... .... . ....
1,110,438 . . ...... . . .... ....
I , ll ,459 ... . . ........... ..
1,160,662 .....•........... .
1,166,967 . ... . .•.. . ........
1,171,200 ..................
1,178,972 ..................
1,179,664 . ... . .............
New class 3.1, fuel inlet at a ir
throat:

mJfi ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

733,695 . .. .• .......... . . . .
765,814 ....•.. . .•. . .......

~:~::: :::: :::::: ::: :::
~:~g::: :: :::: : : : :::::: :

897,259 .... _.. ........ .. ..
132
155.1
155.1
141
132
123
155. 1
149
155. 1
148
155.1
154. 1
155. 1
155
155. 1
155. 1
155. 1
148
132

~:~~: :: : : :::::::: ::': :::

954,965 .... •.. ....... .. ...
984,032 .. .. _.. ...... .. ....
1,014,988 ...... . ....... ....
1,026,425 .....•• .. .... .....
1,033,505 ......... ... ......
1,038,699 ............ . . . . ..
1,052,897 .. ....... . . . ..... .
1,054,728 .. .......... ......
1,003,666 ............. ... . .

~:ggg~::: :::::: :::: :::::

1,101,913 ......•........ .. .

tm:~t: ::: ::::::: : :::::
~::~:rt:: :::::::::::::::
1,148, 166 .. . ...... . .. . . .. ..

:::~:m : :: :: ::::::: : :::: :

261
C.R. 2
C.R.2
C.R.
48
123
48

;~

C. R.
C. R.2
48
123
48
48
C.R.
48
48
48
48
48
48
123
123
C.R.
123

:~
48
48
123
48
C.R.
123
48
48
261
C.R. 2
48
123
123

1~

123
C.R.
48
C.R.
123
C.R. 2
123
C.R.
48
C. R. 2
123
C. R. 2
C. R.
123
123
C. R. 2
C. R.
C. ~8
123
123
4

Subclass.

15

155. 1
136
155. 1
155. 1
155
155. 1
25
155. 1
155
155.2
144
150.1
155.1
155
150. 1
122
122
127
155. 1
155. 1
150.1
150.1
122
144

132
155
155. 1
12
155. 1
131
132
155.1
119
132
148
ISO

7
155.2

7
122
73

155.1
25
99
219

New class 3.2, a ir guides or
barnes:

::~:::: : :::::::::: :::::

m:~k::::::::::::::: : :::

C. R.
48
48
C.R.
48

155. 1
155.1
155.1

159

AERONAUTICS.

United States patents-Continued.
Present official-

I

Present officialPatent No.

Patent No.
Class.

__________________ 1
_______

New class 3.2, air guides or
barnes-Continued.
8li,64L .... . ....... · .... ·
817,941. . . ............... ..

:::.:::::::::::::::::::{
862,083................... .
886.283.. . ..... .. .... .. ... .
9OS,1I2 .. . .......... ..... ..
931,389 .. ........ ........ ·
1,072,376 ... ..... .. . . .... . .

l:l~:m ::::: : : :: ::::: ::::

1.141,570 .. . .... .. . .... . .. ·
Now class 3.3, r otating fu el
spreaderJ air driven :
808,707.. ........ .. ....... · {

::m:~~: ::::: : :: ::::: :: ::

New class 3.4. variable jet and
throat relation :

~%'s~;bi;::::::::: : ::: : ::: :

1,149,903 ................. .
New class 3.5, variablo float
cbamber pressure:
6.~6,101..

........... .. ... ..

741 ,962................... .
954,4 .. .... .......... .. ..
960,601.. ................. .
961,152.. . . _. -. __. - - - .. - _..
992,260 ... . ..... . ........ · .

998,457.................. ..
1,002,646.. ...... .... . .... .

~iffi~~fi·: ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

.. ... . ........... .
N ew class 4, carburetors, l?Toportioning flow aspiratmg,
single fuel, mllltiple air in·
lets, both fixed :
504,723 __ . _.. _.... _... . .. _.
549,939................... .
557,496.. ... .. ............ ·
1,1 86 , 73~

5;~:::::::::::: :::: :: ::.
726,986 ..... .. ..... . ..... .
75-1,001.. ............... . ..

1?S:ib~::::: :: ::::::::::: : :

*~;m:::::: :::: : :::::::::.
991,029...................
994,658........ .'.......... .

e~~~~i

::::::::::::::::::

1,006,088 ................. .
1,019,209 ................. .
1,031,147 ........ . ....... ..

1/
1

New class 4.1, mLxed flow :
681,382 .. . ................. {
684,862.... . . . .. ....... ... .

~~:~~: : :: : ::::: : :::::: : ::

48

123

48

123
261
43

48

155.1
132
155. 1
133

68

155. 1

168

C. R.
C.R.
48
155. 1
C. R. .. ...... ..
<l~
155. 1
48
148
123
261
48
48

141
51
155. 1
155. 1

48
48
48

155.2
155. 1
154.1

C. R.
48

!~

155.2

~~: ~

C. R. ..........
48
155.2
48
155. I
48
ISS. 1
48
155. 1
48
155. I
48
155.1
48
155.1
48
150. 1

C.R.
C. R.
C.R.
C.R.
C.R .
48

I~~

48

123
48
48
48
C. R. 2
123
48
48
48
48

48
48

~~
48
!~
~8

48
123
48
C. R.
48

155.1
150.2
101
155.1
98
155.2
150.2
155. 1

122
155.2
150.1
155. 1
155.1
155
155
148
155. 1
155. 1
150. 3
155
155. 1
155. 1
132
150. 1
155. 1

Subclass.

Cla.ss.

SUbClass. j
New class 4.1, mixed f1owContinued.
801,539 ....... .. ..• . •. . .• . .

rm~~::::::::::::::::::
1,130,490 ... .. ......... · ' "
}:ig:~L ::: ::::: :::: ::: :

New class 5.1 main fuel inlot,
witb supp j ementary Wgh·
speed jet:
1,079,684 .. .......... . .... ·
N ew class 5.2, main fuel inlet,
with supplementary idling
jet:

i;fff,ii4::::::::::::::::: :

New class 5.3, fuel standpipes:
1,093,343 ... ........ .. . ... .
1,148,378 .. .. .... ........ ..
New class 6, carburetors, I?roportioning flow, aspiratmg,
multiple fuel and multiple
air inlets, both fixed:
811,618.. . _........... .... .
861,37 .... _._ . ...... .... ..

l;~~:i~ ::::::::::::::::::
U~:~L:::::::: ::: : ::::

New class 6.1, double carbu·
r etor, progressive by throttle:
898,494. ................ .. .
898,495. _.... .... . . . . ..... .

r~~~J99: ::: :: ::::::::::::

1,011,694 ..... ... ......... .

l;~:~L::::::::::::::::

1,122,571._ ............... .
'ew class 6.2, multiple carburetor, p rogressive by throt·
tIe:
759,624..... .... . . . ....... .
832,184.. ............. ..... .
879,380_ ..... ..... _.... ... .
910,018.. .... ..... _.. . .... .
948,612.. .... ... . ..... .. .. .
1,018,262 ..... . ..... . .... . .
1,021,547 ....... .. ........ .
1,144,206 . ..... . . . ....... . .
1,158,589 ...... .... ....... .

~t2~~~~::::::: :::::::::::

New class 6.3,doublecarburetor , progressi v 0 by vacuum:
851,759 ... . ............. .. .
872,138.. . .. ......•... .....
1,176,627 .. . ............ .. .
1,176,651. ... . .......... .. .
New class 6.4, m ul tiplecarbur etor, progressive'by vacu-

um:

664,134 ..... ......... . ... . .
871,320... . .. . ..... . ...... .
1,049,705 ...... . .......... .
1,072,733 .... ...... ....... .
1,113,221. ......... .. .. .... {
1,146,150 ...... ... .... .. '"
1,180,976 .......... ....... .
1,185,016 . ............ .. .. .
New class 6.5, ruixed flow:
907,953 ................... .
998,123.... .... ......... . . .

123
123
48
48
48
48
48

132
132
150. 3
155. 1
150.3
155.1
150. 1

48

150.3

48
48

150.2
150.3

48

48

150.3
150.3

48
C. R.2
48
48
48
48

148
155.1
150. 1
150.3

48
48
48
48
48

150. 3
150.3
150.3
150. 3
150.3

48

155.1
150.3

C'~8

150.1

48
48
48
48
48
48
48

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3

48
123
48
48

150.3
150· 3

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

150· 3
150·3
150·3
150· 3
150·3
155·1
150.3
150· 3
150·3

48
48

150.1
150. 3

48

!~

48

150.3
9

160

AERONAUTICS.

United Stat es patents-Continued.
Present official-

Patent No.

Present officialPatent No.

Class.

Su bclass.

Class.

Subclass.

1 - - -11·- - - - - - - - - -1 - - - - - - New class 6.5, mL'Ccd flowContinued.

g?5;~~::: ::::: : : : : ::::::

1,0SI,Wl. • . . .. . . •...•• . .. .
1,063,148 . ...•.. . ••.•......
1,089,372 ••• • ..•• •••• .. ....
1,090,047 .. ............... .
1,096,626 .. . .... . ......... .
Re.14,045 . . ............ ..
1,099,277 ....... .......... .
1,109,974 ................. .
1, 112,374 . •.••..•••........
1.116,023 . .. ............... {
1, 143.980 ..... ... ......... .
1, 144,206 . ........ ..... . .. .
1,153,436 .. ....... .. ...... .
1, 170,348 .. •..... .. ..... . ..
1, 170,416 ...• . ......... • ...
1,170,4 17 . •. •.• ...• •.• . .• ..
1,175,536 ................ ..
1,176.267 •. ••••...•••..•...
1,177,624 ••. •.•....•.•.....
1,183,019 .••••••.•..•••..••
1, 183,864 .. .. ... . ... . .... ,.
1,183,673 .• . ..•............
New class 6.6, fuel standpipe:
927,211 ••.•...............•

New class 7, carburetors, ~ro­
portioning Dow, aspiratmg,
single fixed inlet and Single
air inlet with regulating
valve:

864,111 .. ......... ... ..... .
865,539............ .... . .. .
876,BOO ...•. . .......••.•...
911,692 .•. •...•... .. .... .. .
935,833 .•• . .•.•...••....•..
936,118 .... . ............. .
967.407................... .
1,037,833 ......... .. ...... .
1.062,688 ................. .
1, 101,736 ................. .
New class 7.1, fuel inlet be-

tween throttle-controlled
air valve and throttle:

771,492 ••••••.........•...•
789,749 ••••••••.•.• ... .... .
794.927 .•.•.• ... •• .... •... .
810,435.... .. ............. .
823,485 . .................. .
853,428.•......... . •.•... ,.

:::::::::::::::::::::::{
863,739.............. . .... .
867,859 . .•.. •. . .... •.... ••.

=:~::::::: ::: ::::::::::

932,465 ................... .
973.602.. .. ... ............ .
976,13 .. ................. .

r~~3k·. . ·. ::::: :::::::::
1,043,077 ................. .
1,044,754 ................. .
1,054,084 ................. .
1,062,333 ................. .
1,077,881 .. .• . ••••.• ..•.• ..
1,077,910 ......... .. ...... .
1,0!!~10 1 ........• . ........
1,1l).'J,003 . . .... ..... . . . . .. .
1,118.917 ..... .... . ....... .
1,124,724 ................. .
1,135,729 ..... . ... .. ...... .
1,139,851 .•..... . .. . .......

gU:~:::::::: ::::::::::

100.3
155. 1
100.3
100.3
100.3
100.3
100.3
155.1
100. 1
100.3
100.3
100.3
155.1
100.3

·· · .. i5<i.'i
100.3
100.3
100. 3
100.3
100.2
100.3
100.3
16
100.3

48

100.3

48
48
48
4

155.1
155.2
155. 1
155.2
155.1
155.1
155.1
155
155.2
155.1

4
48
48
48
48
48

150.1
155.1
155.1

..· .. i5<i.'i
155.1
131
155
155. 2
155.1
150. ~
155.1
132
100.3
100.2
155.1
155.1
100. 3
155
155.1
100.1
100.1
2S
100.1
155.1
144
155.1
100.1
155.1
155
100. 1
100. 1

New class 7.1, lue! inlet botwecn throttle-controUed
air valve and throttl&-Con·
tinued.
1,100,224 •• .• . . .. •• •••.. . ..
l,l51,159 .... . ... . . .. ..... .
1,151,286 ................. .
1,163,581. ................ .
New class 7.2, fuel inlet at or

100.1
155.1
155. 1
155.1

B27,372 .. .. . . . . .......... .
8W,025 .. ......... .. ... .. .
815,712 ..•• ••. , . ........ ..
816,846 ... . .............. .

51
155.1
155.1
155.1
100.3
155.2
155. 1
155.1
155
155
155.1
100. 3
155.1

before air "alve, which nets
as a throttle:

~~;ksr:::: :::::::::: :::: :

1,014,188 ................. .
1,037,834 .... ... ..... . .... .
1,038,804 ...... . .......... .
I,WS,613 .... . ............ .
I,OB7,449 ............. . .. ..
1,080,118 ................. .
1,088,974 ..... .... ...•... . .
1,108,1 1. .... ........ .... .

~:m;~::::::: :: :::::::::

1,131,312 ..... .. ..... . .... .
1,143,227 ........ . ........ .
1,144,549 ..... . ....... ... . .
1,161,437 ..... .. ......... ..
1,165,224 . ......... . ..... ..
1,171,074 ................ ..
1,172,3 .......... ...... ..
New class 7.3, fuel inlet be-

tween automatic air valve
and throttle:

622, 91. . .... .. ..... . ... ..
657,738 .. ...... ......... ..
666,623 . . ... .... ........ ..
673,901. .. . . ............. .
688,349 . . .. ... ........... .
759,396 ... . . . ........... ..
774,079 .. . . . . . ........ . .. .
785,622 •..• •••.•. •.. . ..•.•
792,628 .... . . .. ......... ..
794,002 ....... ........ ... .
796,723 .. ... . . ........... .
806,434 ... .. . .. ......... . .

820,583 .. ................ .
822,681. . . ....... . .... . .. .

829,345 .................. .

831,547 •••••. • ..•........•
869,675 •••••••. ....... . .•.
886,760 ••••••••.• .........
896,559 .... . ............ ..
911,IOS .... ... .......... ..
921,410 .... .... .......... .
929,327 .... .. ............ .

:H~:::: : ::::::::::::::

966,381 •.•••••• •.• •.•.....

=;$:::::::::::::::::::

~iri26·::.:: :::::::::::::

1,027,768 . .... . ...... . .... .
1,03 ,699 ................ ..
1,039,229 ....... .. ........ .
1,041,099 ..... . . .... ...... .

H!:~::::::::::::::::::

1,124,918 ............ ..... .
1,116,673 ........... .. . .. ..
1,129,864 .............. .. ..
1,132,580 ................ ..

I[,().1

155.1
100.2
155.1
155.1
106
155.1
155.1
100.3
155. 2

·.... in ..
155
122
119
155.1
155.2
155.2
155·2
155.1
155.2
119
155· 2
155·2
155· 1
155·2
155· 2
155·2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
155.2
155.1
155
154.1
100.2
155.1
155.2
155. 2
154.1
155.2
10
155. 2
155.2
150.1
155. 1
155.2
155.2
150. 1

161

AERONAUTICS.

United State8 patent8-ContInued.
Present official-

P resent officialPatent No.

Patent No.
Class.

t

New class 7.3, fuel iniet b(}twcen automatic air valve
and throttle-Con tinued.

1,133,845 .. .............. . .
1, 141,796 . . ... .. ........ . . .

U~;~: : ::::::: : : :: :::::

1,190,540 .. .... .. ... . ..... .

New class 7.4, (uel inlet swept
by air entering through air
valve:

~:::~:::::::::::::::::::: {
799,232 . ...... . . .. . •.......

800,647 .. .... ... .. • . .... ...
855,574 . ... . .... . ... ... ... .
859, 719.... .. ... ... ... . . .. .
875,716.. ... . ............. .
878,411 .. .. ..... ....... . .. .
904,659 ..... . ..... ... ..... .
910,379 ................... .
916,103 .... ....... . •. .. ....
924,200....... .. . . .. _•.... .
925,973 . ..... ..... .. . .. . . . .
926,533 . .............. .... .
928,828 . . ...... . .......... .
943, 197 .. ..... . .....• . ... . .
950,278 . .... .............. .
960,697.. .. . .............. .
963, 187.. .... ... . ......... .
976,344... .. .. ... ........ . .
973, 77 ... . ..... .. . ....... .
995,919. .. . ....... . ••......
997, 169 .... . ... . .. . .• •. ....
1,000,398 .............. ... .
1,005,300 .... .. . . ... . . . . .. .
1,020,931. . ... . . .. . ... . . .. .
1,023,470 . ... .......... . .. .
1,033,503 ............•.....
1,042,982 • . .....•...•.. .. ..

1,052,051. ........ . ....... .
1,084,028 .... . . ........... .
1,088,181 . . ... . ........... .
1,093,901 . . . . .. ... . ....... .
1,095,384 .. . ..... ....•.....
1,110,041. •. ..... .. ..... . ..

1,124,949 ............... .. .
1,131,584 .•.............. . .
1,140,000 ................. .
1,148,247 . .. .. . . . . ........ .
1,157,541. ... ............. .
1,I BO,152._ •••••.. ..• .....•

1,IBO,389 .... •.•.. . ........
1,IBO,939 •••..•.. •. .. . ..•..
1,184,873 . . ... . . . . .... . .... {
New class 7.5, variable !loot
cham ber pressure:
877,890 .. . . .. . .. . .. . ..... . .
993,096 .•.• . ••• . •.•. •. ....
1,103,B02 ••••....••••..... .
1,167,457 ................. .
New class 8, carburetors, li'roportioning flow, aspiratmg,
single fixed fu el inlet, multiple ai r inlets, valved for
regulating:
751,434 .. ..... . .. . . .. ... ...
828,228.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
844,899 .. . . ....... ."...... ..
911,349.. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
920,642. . .. .... . ..... . . ....
929,260. . ............... .. .
944,048. . ......... . ...... . .
970,916. . . ......... . ... ... .
983,836....................
9&;,670....................
997,232. . .. ................
998,355 ............. . ... ...

123
48
48
48
48

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

:~

122

168
150.2
154. 1
154

154. 1
155. 2
155. 2
148
155. 2
155. 2
155. 1
155.2
155.2
154. 1
155.2
155.2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
155. 1
155.2
155. 1
155. 1

~~: ~

48

155.2

48

155.2

C.R .

:~

~~~: ~

48
.48
123
48
48

155. 1
155. 1
7
155.2
155. 1

48
48
48
48
48
48

155. 1
155.2
150. 1
155.2
155. 1
155 . 2

C. R.

C.R.

48
48
48
48
48
48
48

148
155.1
150.2
155.2
155. 1
155
155. 1

48
48
48
48

150.1
154 . 1
155.1

123
48
123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
123
123

Class.

Subclass.

148

127
155. 1
124
155. 1
155.2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
155.1
155. 2
124
98

72805 0 - 8. Doc. 559, 64-2-11

Subclass.

New class 8, carburetors, J;lropor tioning floW aspiratmg,
single flxed fue j iniet, multiple air inlets, valved for
regulating-Continued.

1,000,054 ...... . .......... .
1.001.969 .. .... .......... . .

~;m;i~::::::::::::::::::

tl~;~::::::::::::::::::

!im:~

U~:~~:::::::::: ::::::::

1,123,955 . . . .. ...... . .... . .
1,127,992 .... ... .. . . ...... .
1,128,717 ................. .
1,129,103 .. .. ..... . ...... . .

!lliiY
:

1,173,395 ................. .

New class 8.1, two a ir inlets,
fixed primary, throttles controlled secondary, regulat-

inMiJ49~.1~.e.: . ... .......... .
733,625 ... . .. . ..... ....... .
767,it6 ....... .. . . . _.... .. .
775,353 . ....••.• • . •• . . . •...
794,851. ..... . ••.....•.....
825,531.. .... . ...... . ... . . .
832,532 ....... ..... _...... .
840,204 .. . .... _. _. .. . .. _.. .
842,052... .. .. . _... __ .'.'"
851,285 .. _.. .. _... . _""'"

~;ill: : ::::::::::::::::::

908,764 ...... . . . . .. _...... .
924 ,673 ..... . .. _.. . _.• .....
954,530............ _..... "
959,066 .... ........... ... . .
985,703 . ... . .......•. ... ...
1,011 ,565 .. .. .. ""_"" ' "
1,060,053 .•...• . . •• _.•.....
1,064,514 .. . ..... ... ..... . .
1,081,203 .. ... ..... . .. .. .. .
1,097,401 .... . .. . ........ . .
1,119,181 . . .. . . . ... __ •.....
1,123,027 ........ .. _...... .
1,148,333 .•.... . . . . _... . . . .

1,148,89 ....... .. . . ... .. . .
1,149,597 .. . . .... . ....... . .
1,154,630 ... ...... . _. ..... .
1,184,888 .. ........ _.. . ... .
1,184,889 . . .......... .. . . . .
1,185,273 . . ............... .
Class 8.2, two air inlets, fixed

48
48

155.2
155.2

48
48
123

155.2
155.2
98

48
48
48
123
48
48
48
123
48
48
48
48
48
123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

155. 2
155. 1
150.3
73

C.R.

C.R.

48
48
48
48
48

C. R. 2
C.R.

;~
48

48
48
48
48
48

C. R.

123
48
123
123
48
48
48
48
48
48
123
48
48
48
48

148

168
150. 1
11 9

155.2
148

155. 1
155.1
155.2
52
155.1
150.3
155.1
155.1
155 1
150.2
155. 1
155. 1

155. 1
148

155.1
155.1
155. 1
155.2
155.1
155.1
155. 1
155. 1
155.1
155.1
155. 1
100
155. 1
34

100
155. 1
155.1
155. 1
155.1
155.1
155. 1
108

150.1
155.1
155.1
155.2

primarY automatiC secondary regu j ating air v alve :

649,324 .•. ......... • . ... .. .
664,841. •..................
713,146 .. ......... . _... . .. .
734,421. •...... . . ... .......
741,810. . .......... _. .. ... .
759,001.. . .. . . . . . . . _.. .... . {
785,558_ .. . ... ... ... . . .... .

48
48
48
123
48
123
48
48

155.1
155.2
155.2
123
149
122
155.1
155.!

AERON AUTICS .

162

United States patents -Contin ued.
Present otlicial-

I

i::~r2:: :::: :: ::::::::::::

802,216... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
810,792... .......... ..... _.
823,742 ............ ........
831,832..... .. ..•. . .. ...... {
835,880. ......... . .........
850,339 ............ ........

150.2

C. ~~
48

.. . .. i.ss.· 2
155.2
48

C. R.

1;~
48
48

m~m~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ U

882,170.•........ .. _. . . . . . .
886,526. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . .
888,487. . .... . • .......... ..
888,965.. .......... .... . ...

=:r~::::: : ::::::::::::::
...

123
44~8
';0

18

900,09 ... .. ... .... .....
900,731.. ... . _. .... ..... . . '
907,279. .......... ........ .
912,083 .. _. . . . . •.. . . . . . . • . .

48
48
48
48
48

927,529 ............ ........
928,042 .......... _. . . . . . . . .

48
48

~~:~::: ::::::: ::: :: :::: :

:~

~~::::::::::::::::::.:::::
..... ..• ..

1~

942,977... .. ....
943,242. ......... ... ... ....
945,167... . ....... . . .. . ....
968,597.... .. . . ....... .....
974,076.. .......... ..... . ..
976,558.•.. .... ... ..... ... '
976,692... ....... ... .... ...
Q77,377.. ...... ..... . . .....
979,908... .... ........ .. .. .
981,156 .. .......... ...... _.
984,276.. ........ .. . .. .. .. .
997,233.. ...... ......... ...

r&l!~:: ::::::::::::: :::

1,013,OS2 . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,016,251.. .......... ... ...
1,017,750.. . ..... .. ..... .•.
1,Ot8,776. . . . .......... . ...
1,035,937.. . ... .. .. ...... . .
1,038,262 .. . ...... ...... ...
1,041,480 .. . .... ... .. ... . ..
1,043,M2. .. . .. . . ..........
1,043,692.. .......... .. .. ..

!~:ffiY:

tm~El~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~~ ~ ~

48
48
48
48
48
;8
4
0

~~

48
48
48
48

;~

:g
48
48

C. R. 2

48
48
48
48
48
48

124
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
108
155.1
155.2
155.2
155.1
155.2
155.1
155.2
155.1
155.2
155.1
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.1
155.2
155
155.2
155.1
155.2
150.2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
150.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.1
155.2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
11455~. 2

~ r~!

U {~: ~

148
48
1,065,948 .. .... .. .... .. ....
155.2
48
1<>67,50 2............ .. .. ..
.l{e. 13,784 ... _.......... ... _..... .. . .......... .
122
123
1,067,906 ..... ..... . .......
150.1
48
1,069,399 ...... ... ... ......
155.2
48
1,069,671.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
155.2
48
1,071 ,858 .......... .... ....
155.2
48
1,073,695. .. .. .. .. .. .. . ....
155.2
48
1,076,827 ..... .. .. ..... ....
155.2
48
1,078,169 ... .... . ..... .....
155.2
48
1,078,766 ........... .......
C. R.
1,079,338. .. ... .... . .... . . .

Bubclass.

Class.

Bubclass.

Class.
Class 8.2, two air-Inlets, fixed
primary, au tomatic secondary regulating air valveContinued .

Present otlicialPatent No.

Patent No.

Class 8.2, two air inlets, fixed
primarY,B uLomatics econd·
ary regulat ing air valveContinued .
1,080,645 .... .......... . . ..
1,086,287 _....... _........ .

tl!;~:::: ::::::::::::::

1,093,627 .. .... ... . _...... .
1,095,212 .......... ...... ..

f1mJ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~::. ~ ~: . ~ ~. ~

H~;:t::::::::::::::::::

1,109,356 ... . ....... ... ... .
1,112,257 .. .. . ........ . .. ..

W~:~t~ :: :: ::::::::::::::

48
48
48
48

155.2
155. 2
155.2
155.2

48
48
~~8
•
123
123
48
123
48
48
123
48

155.2

:~

m:~

I Sh. 2

155. 2
155. 2
l OS
136
155. 2
122
155. 2
155. 2
119
155. 2

gg

:~
1,120,303 .... . .. .... .. . .. ..
1,130,915 .......... .. . ... .. C. R. 2 ........ ..
C.R.
1,131,371 ... . .. ...... . . _'"
148
48
1,133,452 ... . . ........ . ... _
155. 1
18

i::~:~~::::::::::::::::::

C.R.

48
123
48
48
48
48
48

122
150
150.1
73
148
15.,. 2
1W.!
150.2
15O.!
155. 2
155.2
148
155
155. 2
150.2
150.1
155.1
155.2
155.2
122
150.1
155.2
155. 2
155.2
150.2

48

154.1

U~;~ ::::::::::::::::::

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

155.2
148
155.2
155.2
155. 2
155.2
155.2
148
150.1
155
148
155.2

both with throttle-co n·
trolled regulating valves:
714 ,597 ........ . ......... ..
776.400 ... . ...... . ....... ..

48
48

155.1
155.1

1,137,057 .. .......... ..... .
1,137,135 .... .. ....... _.... {
1,139,364 .. ... .......... . ..
1,140,064 ... .. ....... .. .. ..
1,141,086 ......... . .... ... .
1,142,793 .......... .... _...
1, 143,092 . .......... ..... ..

g:~:m::: ::: ::::::::::::

1,148.461. ...... .. ... . .... .
1,150,619 . .... .. • .... .. _.. .
1,155,232 .. ... .......... . . .
1,156,149 .. ...... .... ... . ..
1,158,435 .. ........ ...... ..
1,160,239 .. .. .......... ... .
1,162,576 ........ _........ .

U~:~::::::::::::::::::.
......

1,171,145 _..........
1,172,263 ... .......... ... . .
1,172,432_ .......... ...... .
1,176,729 . ........ . ....... .
1,180,379 . ..... . ......... _.
1,184,695 ........ .. . ...... .
New class 8.3, two air inl et.~,
both with regulatin gvah-es,

~g~ot~~~~~cIled~e

other
1,060,545 .......... ....... .
New class 8.4, two air inlets,
both with automatic regu·
lating valves:

~;r~::::::::::::::::::::
806,830 ..... .... ... ...... ..

890,494 ......... . . .. ...... .

~,~:::::::: ::: :::::::::

1,136,675 .. .... .. . ...... .. .
1,141,258 . .. ....... . ....... {

123
48
48
123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

!~

48
48

:~

New class 8.5, two air inlets,

163

AERONAUTICS.

United States patent -Continued.
Present oflicial-

Present oflicialPatent No.

Patent No.
Class.
New class 8.5, two air inlets,
both with throttle - controlled r~ating valvesContinu •
846,471. •.••• . • . •••. .. .• ..•
856,638 .•.. ••• •.. . •• . .•. . ..
871,730 . ..... •.•.. .•. •.... .
905,012. _................ . .
964,657._ . . ___ • _. . • . .. __ ...

C. R- . ...... . ..

r,g{~~~28::::::::::::::::: :

1,072,565 ...... . ...........
New class 8.6, mixed flow:

~~;~M::::::::::::::::::::

802,038• . ...• ... ....... . ..•

~~i~5: :::: :::::::::::: :
1,095,510 . . .. . . . ...........

N~w

class 9, carburetors, {lroportioning flow, a"Riraling,
multiple fixed fue inlets,
single air inlet with regulating valve:

48
123
48
48
48
48

154.1
132
155. 1
154 .1
150.3
155.1

48

150.1

~:~:~~::::: : ::::::: : ::::

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
154
150. a
150.3
150. 3
150.3
150.3

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

48
48

150.3
155.1
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
155.1
150.3
150.3
150. 1
150.3

~:~~~;b~::::::: :::::::::::

48
48

150. 3
150.3

~~g{~~08 ____ .·.'.'.::::::::::: :

48
48
48

155.1
150. 3
150.3

• progressively with opening
of single automatic au-inlet
regulating valve:

~:m;m:::::::::::::::: ::

New class 9.2, fuel inlets act
progressivoly with 0ren~
of s~le throttle con roll
air·' et regulating val VOl or
air val ve acting as throt Ie:

858,437 .. ' •...... .......•..

~l:~:::'"" .,,,

_ , .·_ _ :::::::

989,515 .......••• . .........
1,010,051. .. . ..• __ ... . . . __ .
1,073,179 .• . ... .. •.....••..
1,089,524 ... . .. . ...........

~:~g~::::::::: :: :: : ::::

1,159,851. •... . ......... ••.
1,162,30 """ "" "" " "
1,183 ,221. .•......•. ..... • ..
1,183,222 . . . .... . .. . ... . ...
New class 9.3, fuel standpipes:

New class 9.4, two fuel inlets,
one main and one idling:

1,147,940 . . . .•.............

New class 9.5, tilting fuel
chamber, radially disposed
fuel inlets:

989,307 . .. • •. ....•. ........
1,065,977 • •. . .. . .•....... . .

~;n~:m::::::::::::::::: :
U~;~L:: : ::::::: :::: ::

New class 10, carburetors, {lroportioning flow, aspiratmg,
multiple fixed fuel inlets
with air inlets, val ved for
regulation:

:~

48

48
48
48
48
48
48

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.1
150
150.3

928,121. .. •..••.. .... . .. . ..
958,476 . . .. .•• •••. ... .. . ..
97 ,558 ... •. •.•.....•......
993,770 ...••.... . •. . • . • ....
1,022,703 .. • . •...•. . .. .. . ..
1,041,481. . . . ..••. . .•......
1,046,434 ... . •.•••..•......
1,078,349 . • .... .. .... . .....

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
155. 1
150.3
155.2
155.2
155.1
150.3
155.2
155.2
155.2
150. 3
155.2
154.1
150.3

48
48
48
48
48

155.2
150.3
150.3150.3
150. 3.

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

150.S150.3150.3
150. 3"
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.1
150.3
150.&

1,040,414 .. . .. . . ... . .......
1,108,245 . . . . .•.....•... . ..

48
48
48
48
261
123
48

154. 1
155
148
155. 1
155. 1
155.1
38
100
155.1

1,177 ,538 ••. .. . . .•.........
New class 9.1, fuel inlets act

1,074,574 ... .. .....•.....•.
1,074,575 . • .....•... . ......
1,119,076 .••... ... ... . .•... {
1,130,474 . • ...•..•.• ...... .
1,130,950 . • ....... """ '"

Subclass.

i;5:~t:::::: ::::::::::

"""';f

!~i~::::::::::::::::::::

Class.

Subclass.

48
48

150.3
150.3

961,481. ... .. ....... . ..... '
1,010,116 ..................
1,133,527 .... .. ............
New class 10.6, mixed flow :
973,755 . •.......•....... . ..
1,040,619 .•..•.... . .. . .....

48
48
48

150.3
150.3
148

48
48

155.2
150.&

979,700. """" •.•• .•..•..
1,014,551. ••. . • ••.••• _..•. .
1,099,547 ___ . _.. _. ___ . _. _..
1,163,393 ___ .... .. . ........ {
1,166,112 •... . ... . .......•.
New class 10.1, main fuel in-

let, with supplementary
high-speed jet:

1,099,293 .. .... •.• .. ......•
1,107,849 ................. .
1,119,078 . . .. . •. ...•. .• . ...
1,120,763 ... .. ........ . ....
1,128,773 ......• . •... . . . ...
1,134,531 .......•• , • •. .. .. .
1,134,532 .••... .. . . ........
1,159,423 ... . .... . ...•. . ..•
1,163,223 . ...... •... ... . ..•
1,177,31 .- . .. .. .. .... . ....
1,178,473 ...•..............
1, ISO,518 . . .....•..........
New class 10.2, main fuel inlet,

with supplementary idling
Jet:

1,055,352 .... . •.• . ...•. . ...
1,104,560 .•• . ..•...... . .. . .
1,153,487 . •.••••... . .. . ....
1,166,308 . ..•.• . . .. . .. . . .. .
1,181,128 .....•............
New class 10.3, multiple car-

buretor, progressive, by
throttle, WIth individual au·
tomatic inlet, regulating

val\l'es:
871,741. •• ••....•. . ... .. . . .
881,416 . • .•.•. .. .•........ ,
891,219 •• . •... . • .•. ........
900,604 ... .... . .• . . ••.. •...
1,001,950 .. .. . .............
1 ,0 ,091 .................
1,113,551. •......... "" '"
1,152,031. •....•.. .. .. . ....
1,172,701 •..... . • . •••.... . .
1,179,278 ........ .. .......•
1,ISO,483 .•.• . ...•.... . ....
1,183,0 I. . ...... . .........
New class 10.4, multiple car-

48
48

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3
150.3

AA

buretor, progressive, by
vacuum, with individual
automatic air inlet regulating valves:

New class 10.5, fuel standpipe:
48
48
48
48

48

164

ABRON AUTICS.

United States patents-Continued.
Present officlalPatent No.
Class.
New class 10.6, mixed flowContinued.
1,103,903 .•.......• . .... . ..
1,123,469 ...... . ........ . . ,
1,168,513 .••...... • ........
1,169,616 .............. .. . .
Newclsss 11.1,singleCuel inlet
valve, throttle controlled:
583,508 . .. .. ......... .... . '

~1:m::::::::::::::::::::

873,392 . . .. . .............. .

~~:~::::::::::::::::::::

1,055,042 ................. .
1,097,039 ... . . .. ....... .. . .
1,120,183 ................ . .
1,124,697 . ........... .. ... .
1,126,690 ... . .... . ........ .
1,153,999 ... . .......... .. . .
New class 11,2, single Cuel inlet,
independently controlJad by
aIr flow or vacuum:
725,741. .. ... . .... ......•..

~N~~::::::::::::::::::::

97~/~62 .................•..

1,1J()O,503 ...... .• ...... . ...
1,085,194 ... ............•..
1.092.079 ..... .. ....... .. . .

~:m:~ : ::::::::::::::: ::

1,155,407 .. .. ...... ... .... .
New class 11.3, mixed flow:
771,096 .•. .. .. ...........•.
New class 12, carburetors.
proportioning flow, aspirat·
ing, single Cuel and alr in·
lets, both with regulating
valves:

~l~l;;; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ~;
t~J;~t::::: ::::::::::::
1.032.547 ................. .

1,155.457 ....... .... ... .. . .
1,169,574 .... ....... ..... . .
New class, 12.1, valved fuel
inlet beyond alr·inlet valve,
acting as throttle, fuel valve
controllad by air valve:
623.568 .... .. •... ... .......

i;~) ~) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~)~ ~; ~ ~ ~

~M:~::::::::::::::::::::

m:m::::::::::::::::::::

775.614 ... ................ .

~r;~::::::::::::::::::::
~!~::::::::::::::::::::

816.477.•... . . ...... .... ...
818.853 ................... .

ti~:~::::::::::::::::::::

889,032. .. .... . .. .. ..... .. .

894,225 .•••••••••...••.••••

Present officlalPatent No.

Subclass.

48
48
48
48

150.3
150.3
15 .3
150.3

123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
C.R.
48
48
48
48

123
155. 1
155.1
155.1
155.1
168
154.1
155.1

. .. ..i50: 3
150.3
154.1
155.1

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

155
148
154.1
150.3
155.1
154.1
154.1
155. 1
150.1
ISO. 1

48

155.1

C.R.2
C.R.
48
48
C.R.
48
48
48
48
C.R.
48

I

154.1
155.1
154.1
155
155.1
144
154.1

Class.
Now class 12.1, valved fuel
inlet beyondair·inlet valve.
acting as throttle, Cuel valve
controlled by air valveContinued.
909,490.......•.•..........

1m::

i~~m~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~
~~~i·::::::::::::::: : ::

1,003,019 ...•... .. .........
1,013,955 ..... ..... ....... .
1,014,945 ................. .
1,028.723 ... .... ... ....... .
1,084.693 ....... . .. .. ..... .
1,086,594. ......... .. ..... .
1,09~ ,995 . . ... ... ..... . ... .
1,107.713 .. .............. . .
1,107.698 ..... ............ .
1,121,651 .. . .....••........
1,145, 24 ................. .
1,157.363 ...... ... ..... . . . .
1,171,235 . .... ' ........... .
1,172,595 .......•..........
1,183,125 ...... ... ...... .. .
1,184,541 .. . .............. .
1,190,124 ...... ........... .
New class 12.2, valved fuel
inlet between air· inlet "alve
and throttle, both Cuel and
air valves controllad by the
throttle:
780.949 ....•..•............

JI::

865.522 ••..•.... . •.•.......
883,740 •...•.... . ..........

~~lli;;;;;;; ;;;;;~~;; ~~;;
956.882 . •.••.. •.........•..

123
C.R.2
48

48
C.R.
123
123
123
48
261
48
123
48
123
48
C.R.
48
261
48
C. R. 2
123
48

132

·····iss· ·
150.3

..... i3i"
132
102
155.1
44
168
123
155. 1
129
155

..... is4: i
41

155
108
150

m~~m i::::::::::::~~i i::::::::~:
ii:i ~i:
~:~::St::

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
123
C.R.
48
48
C. R.
48
C.R.
48
48
48
48

!~
;~
48
48

48
48

1~

:~

48
48
48
48
48
C.R.
48

:~
48
48
48
48

:~

1,007,729 ... .. ... ....... .. .
1,011,696 . . ... ..... . . ..... .
1,012,7 1. . ... .... ...... .. .
1,018,164 ...... .. .. ..... .. .
1,0'21 ,19 ••.• • •••••.•• . •.••
1,027,459 ..... . .......... . .
1,033,886 ......... ...... . . .
1,042,528 ........•.. .. .. ...

48
48
48
C. R.
48
48
48
48
48
48

1,076,268 .•..•... ....... ...
1,080,815 . .....• . . . . .......

123
48
48
48

t:~~:~::::::::::::::::::
i:~:~~::::::::::::::::::
i:~:~:::: : ::::: ::: : ::::

~

Subclass.

154. 1
155. 1
150.3
155.1
154.1
155.1
155
154.1
150.2
155.1
155.1
155.1
154.1
155.1
131
148
155.1
155.1
155. 1
155.1
150.1
150. 3
155.1
155.1
154. 1
155.1
155. 1
156

155.1
155.1
132
155.1
155. 1
155
154.1
155.1
155.1
155.1
155.1
155.1
155.2
155.1
155
155.1
155.1
154.1
155.1
155.1
155. 1
150.3
155. 1
155.1
155.1
155
155
155
155. 1
155. 1
155. 1
123
150.3
155.1
155.1

165

ABRONAUTICS.

United States patents-Continued.
P resent o:tIicialP atent No.
Class.
N ew class 12.2, valved [uel
inlet hetween air·lnlet valvo
and throttle, both fuel and
air valves controlled by the
throttle-Continued .
1,120,845 .•.. .. . ...........

::::::::::::::::::

1,155,094 .............. . .. .
1,176,516 ••................
1,178,296 . . ..... . .... .. ... .
1,183,587 •.. ..... . .. .. .....
1,185,574 ... . ... ..... . ... . .
New class 12.3, valved fuel in·
let at or In front o[ air valve,
acting as throttle, fuel valve
controlled by air valve:

155.1
150.3
155.1
155. 1
155.1
155.1
123
148
155.1
150.3
155. 1

123

1,135,544 .. . . ... .. .•. .. .. . .

103

~~:m::::::::::::::::::: :
~~:55~::::::: :::::::::::::

C. R . 2

~:~i~::: :::::::::::::::::

C.R.

746,833.• . ....... . .........
73,392 .•......... . ........

~imlf~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ; ~ ~. ~ ~: . ~:.

C. R. 2
C. R.2
48

~;UF:l:.:.:: :::::::::::::

>

100

123

129

C. R.

C.R . ......... .
~~
~~

48
48
48
48
48
48
48

C. R .
48

:~

C.

~~

48
48

1,103, 178 . ..... . ... . .•.....
1,112,641.. . ...... .. ....... {

48

tm~~~L ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~

1,181,356.... ... .......... .
1,190,125... .. ... ....... .• •
New class 12.5, val ve fuel inlet
b etween automatic air·inlet
valve and throttle, fuel valve
controlled by automatic air
valve:

~!\m~~~~~~~~~ (jj j: jjji j
826,531. •••••• •. ..••.• . . .•. {

New class 12.5, valve fuellnlet
between a u tomatic air·inlet
val ve and throttlc,[uel valve
controlled by au tomatic air
valve-Contlnued.
839,707 ... . ........•.......

~~H~L::: ::: :::::::::::

895,709 .. ..... .. ... . ...... .
901,345 ..... .. ............ .
906,671. • . ..... . ... ... .. . ..
926,84 .. . .. .......•.......
941,406 •• . .•......•. . .. . . . •
941,424 ...... . ............ .
954,785 .. .. . .............. .

~~~;~~:::::::::::::::::: ::

!~:~i::::::::::::::::::::

994 ,195.••...••..•....•....

995,623 ..... .......... . . .. .
996,981. . . . ..•............
997,417 .. ......... . ...... .
99 ,993 .. .. .. . ........... .

t:~:~i:::::: ::::::::::::

1,006,411. . . .... . ...... . .. .
1,010,003 ... . .•............
1,014,319 ... . . ...... . ..... .
1,016,169 ..... . .. . ........ .
1,020,270 .......•• ...... ...

t:~:~~::::: :::::: :: :::::

1,040,526 .......... . ...... .
1,042,017 .. ............ ... .

t:~~:!i~:::::: :: : :::::::: :

1,049,887 ............... . . .

t:~g:~~: : : :::: :: :::::::: :

k

t;~~;~r:·:·:::::::::::::::

155.1
150.3
155.1
155.1
155.1
155.1
150.3
150.3
150.3

Class.

1,064,867 •.................

m:~~~~~ ~ ~~: ~: ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~
48
1,010,714................. .
1,018,164 . .................
1,019,160... . ..............
042
{982 . . . ......... . . . .. . }

104.1

123

!:m:ri

New class 12.4, valved [uel in·
let between automatie air·
inlet valve and throttle, fuel
valve controlled hy throttle:
747,264....................
755,074 .. . ................. }

Subclass.

48
48
48
48
48
48
123
48
48
48
48

U~',~~: :::::::::::::::::

gt~:~~~

Present ofllcialP atent No.

:g
:~

it

48
48

261
123
48
48
48
48
48

150.3
150
155.1
155.1
35
155. 2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.1
150. 1
104.1
155. 1
155. 1
150.3
148
104.1

t1~i~r~~ ~ ~~:~: ~). ~:) ~:
1,103,864. ...•...... . .... . . {
1,104,494 .......... . ..... . .
1,115,951. . . ..... . .••..... . {

}:m:~~~::::::::::::::::::
1,120,128 •.....••...... . . . {
1,123,048 . ..... ........ . . . .
},125,525 .. ___ ... . ..... _.. .
1,126,249 . ..... ... . . .. . . .. .
1,130,350 . ...... .. ...... .. .
1,133,754. ...... . .... . .... .
1,135,211 ........ . ..... ... .

U~g:m::::::::::::::::::

156

1,140,525 ... ... . .•...... ...
1,141,085 .. ... ... ... ... ... .
1,143,779 .. . . . ....... '" . . .
1,145,172 .......•• .. .... ...
1,145,871. .............. . . .
1,147,644 ................. .

50
123
155
104. 1
150. 3
104.1
155.1

1,159,029 ... . . ... . •....... .
1,159,049 .. ..... .. ........ .
1,161,374 ................. .
1,162,630 ............. .... .
1,166,173 ....... .. . .. •. . . ..
1,167,426 ........ ..... ... . .
1,168,782 . • . . . .......•. . ...

U~~;: : ::: : :: :: :: : :::: : :

48
48
48
48
48
261
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

:~

48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

C.R.
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

Subclass.

154.1
155.2
154 . 1
150.3
150. 3
57
154.1
154.1
15O.J
150.3
154.1
154.1
150.3
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154. 1
154.1
154.3
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
154.1
15'1. 1
154.1
154.1
155. 1
154.1
154.1
154
154.2
155.1
155.1
154.1
154
154. 1
154.1
104.1
150.3
155. 1
150.3
154.1
154.1

··· .. i54:i
150.2
154.1
154.1
150.2
150.3
154.1
154.1
154.1
154 .1
150.3
148
154.2
154.1

166

AERONAUTICS.

United States patents- Co ntinued.
Present official-

Present official. Patent No.

Patent No.
Class.

Subclass.

inlet between air ·inl et
valve and throttle, fuel
valve controlled independ·
ently by vacuum or air flow:
838,085 ••... .. .... . ....•... {
918,607 . ••.•...•......•.•. .
1,0!8,954 ..•. .. ....... .... .

~:ggr:~~~::::::: : : ::: ::::::

1,126,159 .••..• •...... .•••.
1,133,90L .........•.......
1,137,727 . . ....•.•.•.......
1,148,2H ........ . ........ .
New class 12.7, variable float

chamber pressure:

1,010,066 •. •. ..... . •..•... .
1,010,184 . .••.•............
1,025,816 . ........ . •.......
1,029,h'97 .......... •. ....•.
New class 13, carburetors, pro-

portioning flow, aspiratm/?,
single fuel and multiple alC
inlets, both with regulating
valves :

813,653 .. . . . . . .•. . . ...•.• • •

ill~m~~~~ ~ ~~~~~ ~~~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~

1,051,440 .......• . •..•. • •..

~:8~:fl~::::. :::::::: :::::

1,118,805 .•.• • ••• • • ••••••• •

g~::::: ::::::::::: : : ::

1,158,324 ..• •. •..•••• • •••• •
1,178,064 . . ' • • •... . ••.. . ••.
1,191,156 . .•• • . • . ...•.• ..••
New class 13.1, valved fuel in·

let, fixed pnmary air, /txed
or valved secondar! air inlet, tbrottle contro of fuel
inlet val ve and of secondary
air valve:

886,265 .•. •..•......... ... .
892,499 ... .....•.........•.
9SO,423 . . ................. .
955,292 .• .. ....••••.... . ...
976,258 . . • . ...•.•..••......

~:g~:~r : :::::::::::::::: :

1,065,462 ............. .. .. .
1,088,664 ..•..•...•.•......
1,116,192 •....•••.......•..
1,125,339 .. . .... . . .. ...... .

g~:rz?:::::::::::: : :::: :
1,148,485 ...•......... ..•..
1,156,084 . •...• ... .•••.....

g~:~~L::::::::: :: :::: :
1,192,213 ••............ . ..•

Subclass.

New class 13.2, valved fuel
inlet, valved 'primary and
secondary air inIcts, tbrottlc control oC both air in·
lets and Cuel inlet valve:

New class 12.5, valve fuel in·
let between automatic air·
inlet valve and tbrottle, fuel
valve controlled by automaticair valve-Continued.
1,168,783 ..•.. ......•.... . •
1,171,679 .. ... . .... . .. . . . . .
1,171,716 .•........•. . ... . .
1,172,397 . .•.•••..•..••••••
1,176,600 .••....... . ..•.•. .
1,178,832 . . ••......... ..•.•
1,179,568 . •••.•..... .... . .•
1,179,913 .•• .. . •. . •. .. •• . ••
1,182,714 . • . . ...... ..• ....•
1,183,183 • . . • .•.•....... •.•
1,190,715 ...• • •..... .. •...•
New class 12.6, valved luel

Class.

48

il
:~
U

:~

154.1
154.1
154.1
148
150.1
ISO. 3
154. 1
IJ4.1
148
150.3
155.1

123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

124
155.2
154.1
154. 1
154.1
155. 1
1St 1
150.3

48
48
48
48

150.3
154.1
154.1
154.1

48
48

155. 2
155.1

123
48
48
48

123
155.1
154.1
150. 3

C.R .
C. R .

C.R.

C. R.

48
48
123
48
48
48

~~

48
48
48
48
48

!~

·· ···i50:i
154. 1
123
154.1
154.1
156

~~:~
154.1
155.1
ISO. 3
155
155

~~n

C.R .......... .
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

155. 1
155
155.1
150.3
ISO. 3
155
156
155.1

f'?3~66: : ::: ::::: ::::: :::

48
48
48
48

155. 2
148
155.1
155. 1

48
48
48

154. 1
154. 1
155.1

!~
48
48
48
48
123
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
48

155.2
155.2
155.2
154.1
155.2
155. 2
155. 1
155.2
155. 2
132
155.2
155.2
155.2
155.1
155. 1
ISO. 1
155. 2
155. 1

48
48

155.2
155.2

1,162,111 . . ..•... .. ........
1,179,663 .... .....•.•.... ..
New class 13.3, valved fuel

inlet, fixed primary and
throttle-controlled second·
aryair inlets,Cuelvalvccon·
trollcd by the vacuum or air
Dow indopendently:

1,079,947 •.... . ........... .
1,081,222 ... . ........ . .•.•.
1, 125,23 ...•..........•..•
1,13 1,157 . .. .•.. .... ...•..•
New class 13.4, valved fuel

C.R.

inlet, fixed primary and
automatic valved secondary
air inlets, fu el valve con·
trolled by the tbrottle:

744,257 ••..•••....... . .•.••
870,052.•....• .•.... . ......
971,689 .••• . . . ........ • .. ..
971,862. . ••.••.. ..... . .....
1,042,004 • • .. ••.. ... .. ••.. .
1,052,917 • .. ..• ...•. . ••....
1,057,506 ....• . .. ••.• .....•
1,096,569 •. .. ..............
1,106,226 ....•.... . ........
1,106,802 • • .. ••.. . .........
1,113,533 ••. •••...•••.•..••
1,122,572 . .. . .•..• . .... .. . .
1,126,21 . ..... ...... . .•...
1,140,071. . .• . . ..... .. .•...
1,140,722 ..•. .. ... . ...••...
1,152,134 ..• •.. ...•........
l ,lil,401. .••.....•....... .
1,1i3,762 ...••.... . ........
ew class 13.5, valved fuel

:1

inlet, ft.xed primary and
automatic , 'alved secon·
dary air inlets, fuel valve
controlled by the automatic
secondary alC valve:
844,894 .• . .. . . . •.. . . ....•..

855,liO . ....••.......... . ..
876,287 . • .•.•.......•......
886,545 .. .............. . . . .
920,731.. ...•... . ....... . . .
962,649 ..... .• •...... • •.. . .
976,237 .........•. • ••...••.
979,555 ................... .
981,853 .. . . ........... .... .
994,191. ......•......••....
1,010,185 ..... •. . • .• __ ••...
1,014,682 •.................
1,022,702 . ......•..........
1,030,343 . ................ .

C.R.

48

C.

154

~8 ·····iM.·i
48

!~

1,038,050 •....• ... ... •.....

1,042,017 ••.....•••••.. •...
1,046,111 ••.•..•...•...• . ..
1,067,623 •• . •......... .....
1,069,389 • • .•............ ..
1,069,817 •• •..•. .• •• . ......
1,071,003 • .......•.........
1,077,256 .. ........ .... ... .
1,078,413 •. ..•........•....
1,078,590 ••................
1,078,591 • ••..•. •••. . ......
1,080,696 •••............•..
1,095,402 . •...•............
1,106,226 ••.... ............
1, 111,224 •.......... ••.•. ..
1,114,222 ....... .. ..••.....
1,118,126 ..•.. . . . ...... • ...
1,120,573 •... .•. . .... ... .. .

154. 1

48

c. R.

C.
C.

C.

1

C.

48
48
48
48
R.
R.
48
48
48
48
48
R.
48
48
48
48
R.
48
48
48
48

154.1

~~: t
154. 1
I SO. 3
154. 1
155.2

154. 1
154. 1
I SO. 3
154. 1
154. 1
154.1
154.1
154. 1
154. 1
I SO. 1
154. 1
148
154

167

AERONAUTICS.

United States patents- Continued.
P resent official-

Present officialP at ent No.

Patent No.
Class.
New class 13.5, valved fuel
inlet, fixed primary and
automatic valved secondary air inlets, fuel valve
controlled by the automatic
secondary air valv&--Continued.

New class 14.1, two fuel inlets,
one fixed main and ono
valved supplementary highspeed jet, two a ir inlets, one
fL"ed prircary and one
valved secondary:

1,120,573 ___ . ____ _. __ ._. _._

48

1,130,502. _... ... . .... , .. . .
1,135,689 . ............... . .
1,140,525 .... .......... . .. .
1,155,726 .. . . ......•.......
1,156,823 ••. . . .. . ..........
1,158,359 .. ... .. . . . . . ......
1,158,494. . .... .. .. ... . .. ..
1,155,359 . . ......... .. . . ...
1,167,217 . . . . _. . .. . _...... .
1,179,701. . ....... . . ... . . ..
1,183,538 ._ •... . . ... ... . ...
1,184,696 ...... .. ..........
New class 13.6, valved fu el
inlet, Valved primary and
secondary a ir, both automatic, (uel valve controlled
bl one or both automatic
alt inlet valves:

48
48
48
48

~~~l~f::::::::::::::::. :
1,04,954. . ... . . ... . .. .. . .

1,087,187 • . ... .. ........ . ..
1,105,134._ .•.. . . _.........
1,125,525 .... . .. .. .. ......
N ew class 14, carburetors,
vroportioning flow, aspirat~, multiple fuel and air
. cts, both with regulating
va l ves:
1,123,508 .... ..... • _" _. ...
1,163,749 . . . . .. . ... _. •.....

•

Class.

Subclass.

!~
;~
48
48

48
48

48
48
48

;~
48

C.R.

123
48

154. 1
148
154. 1
154.1
148
154.1
154. 1
148
154. 1
150.2
150. 2
154 .1
154. 1

154. 1
155.2
155.1
154.1
154.1
155.2

123
155. 1

~:~~~;~~::: : : :::: :::: :::::

1,172,031. . ••..... .... .... .

tgg:~ : :: : : :::::::::: : ::

New class 14.2, multip le carburetors, progressive by
throttle or vacuum:

trnJ~~~~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~ ~~ ~

New class 15.1, thermostatic
controls:

~:~r:~~i: : ::::::::::::::: :

1,105,016 _•... . . .... . ......
1,110,131. . .. . . . .... .. .....
1,133,872 ._ . . . . ............
1,135,270 ...... _.... ... . .. .
1,137,219 ....... ... .. . •. .. .
1,142, 24 ................. .
1,143,230 . .•...............
1,145,476 ... . ......... . ...•
1,149,743 ..................
1,165,07 .... . ..... _.......
1,189,786 . .• .. . .. .. ........
New class 15.2, barometric
controls:
1,049,038. _. .. . .... _.. . . . . •
1,09 ,783 .......... _.. .. .. .

48

48

48
48
48

48
48
48

48
48
48
123
48

Subclass.

150.3
150. 3
150.3
155.2
150. 3

150.3
150.3
150.3
150.1
149
149
127
150

~~
48

154. 1
148

l~~
48
48
123

124
149
155. 1
155. 1
124

48
48

155.1
144

148

REPORT NO. 11.
PART IV.

STRUCTURAL CHARACTERISTICS AND FUNCTIONAL
OPERATION OF EACH OF THE NEW CLASSES AND SUBCLASSES OF PROPORTIONING-FLOW CARBURETORS.
By

CHARLES

E.

LUCKE.

GENERAL.

Carburetors, as devices or appliances for making a suitable explosive
mixture of air with a volatile liquid fuel, were not created with any
definite class idea of the mixture requirements of the engine or of
the mixture-making characteristics of the various physical principles
of functional operation and the mechanical limitations on the execution of each. At the time when oil refining began to produce the
light petroleum distillates, now so generically classed as gasoline, in
any quantity internal-combu tion engines were in operation, using
manufactured illuminating gas and natural gas as fuel. Something
was 1mown of these engines through the familiarity of use, and the
means of making explosive mixtures of such gases and air as the
working fluid for their operation were understood. Most of these
engines were small; all were stationu,ry and operated at constant
speed; and practically all, if not quite so, were governed by hit-andmiss appliances, according to which the quantity of fuel and air per
suction stroke is constant when any is taken at all, and no graduation
of the charge per stroke with load. Under such circumstances the
mixer and proportioner could be of the simplest concei,able sortno more than two holes, one through which the gas could flow and
the other for the air, with a manual adjustment for the size or area
of one or both to secure the desired working proportions. Usually
rhe gas supply came to the engine under pressure- whatever pressure
existed in the mains of the city or in the natural-gas distributing
pipes-so it is natural that a periodic operating valve should be
lLdded to the gas connection so gas would not flow out except during
engine suction, the gas valve being opened during the suction stroke,
either automatically by the suction or mechanically from the valve
gear by a direct connection to the main inlet valve motion. Adjustment of proportionality of gas to air and its maintenance under such
conditions of use is no more difficult than for steady, continuous flow,
and two openings, the relative area of which is manually adjustable,
will quite accurately fix the proportions, whether a periodic fuel stop
,alve be added or not. The proportions will be maintained so long
as the gas pressure does not change, a condition met by the addition
of a gas-pressure governor to the system.
169

170

AERON AUTICS.

This situation is most significant, because it explains not only the
origin of one large class of early engine carburetors, but also the
trend of development from this group of carburetors must neces5arily have been strongly influenced by the nature of the start. This
influence of the early carburetor, desIgned to replace the gas mixer
and proportioner of early hit-and-miss gas engine to make it a corresponding gasoline engme, has been doubly strong on the rest of
the art because such engines are still in use and others have ap peared for which the same sort of carburetor or "ga oline mixer"
is equally adapted. Such, for example, is the case with the small
single cylinder two-cycle boat engine, where a constant charge per
stroke is taken and the speed is normally constant and simplicity
ahd cheapness in all parts are more important than high efficiency
or light weight per horsepower.
Assuming a grade of gasoline such that the amount that air
could support in combustion would immediately vaporize when
mixed with it, a grade easily obtained in the early oil refining days,
then feeding and proportioning such a fuel to its air involves no different problem than h ad already been solved for gaseous fuel.
Therefore, there appeared quite early this class of carburetors,
now often called" mixers," which involved at first a supply of gasoline under pressure maintained by an elevated tank, a fuel valve
periodically opening with the engine suction valve to stop the fuel
flow between suctions, a manually adju ted restricting valve in the
gasoline line, always open for securing the desired proportions, and
arranged so that the gasoline could run into the air in any way at
all when it did flow. The variations in structural form that this
simple arrangement can take are somewhat surprising as re\ealed
by the cases under class 1 and its subclasses, from which practically
all later schemes and modern practice in gasoline proportioning flow
carburetors may be said to ha\e been deyeloped.
Of course, a pressure supply of such a volatile fu el involves elements of risk, both of explosion and fire, as well as trouble in operation wllen valve leakage between strokes becomes appreciable,
which need only to be recognized to inaugurate modifications.
These changes are found to follow two lines; first, the use of a 12ump
directly, and second, the indirect use of a pump to a small aUXIliary
fuel chamber from which the fuel is taken by the aspirating action
of the vacuum that results from the flow of air through restricted
inlet passages. The suction stroke of the engine induces a flow of
air through the air passages to the cylinder and may be made to
actuate an air motor driving a fuel pump to constitute a proportioning flow carburetor, as described in the cases of class 2. Proportionality is to be secured with this kind of apparatus by the relation
between the fuel volume displacement of the pump and the air volume passing through and actuating the air motor. The pump may
draw fuel dIrectly from a main tank at a lower level than the engine,
or from a small auxiliary tank or chamber kept supplied by a second
feed pump, or the pressure supply may be retained. From such a
small auxiliary t ank or chamber, maintained automatically at a constant level by flo at valves, diaphragm valves, or overflow pipes, and
supplied from a low level main tank by a feed pump or from a pressure supply, the fuel may be caused to flow into the air by the

ABRON AUTICS.

171

vacuum developed in the latter by its flow, the fuel inlet to the air
being above the fuel level in the constant level chamber.
This is a reasonably logical step and may be carried out with the
same manually adjusted, but otherwise fixed and constantly open , air
and fuel inlets used previously with pressure-fuel supplies, modeled
on the gas mixer for hit-and-miss gas engines, but omitting the
periodic fuel valve as not needed because of the aspiration principle.
In this way the aspirating proportioning-flow carburetors with single fixed inlets were started, and their various forms are illustrated
by the cases of class 3 and its subclasses. These are still in use and
improvements in them are still appearing. For engines that take a
substantially constant charge per stroke or that are attended by operators capable of modifying the adjustment when the charge per
stroke must be materially changed, they are good enough, otherwise
they are not satisfactory. They are now divisible into two groups
with r eference to the constant-level chamber and its fuel supply,
which division does not affect their proportionality characteristics at
all, the stationary-engine group almost universally, but not quite,
uses an overflow cup, supplied by a constant displacement enginedriven pump from an un lerground tank, while the transportation
engine, when it uses this sort of carburetor at all, is provided with a
pressure supply of fuel to a fl oat chamber; this is the case with
marine engines, but some tractors, especially those with the hit-andmiss control, still use the pump and overflow cup.
1£ the gasoline engine requiring a graduation of supply per suction
stroke and taking a charge for every such stroke, graduated in quantity to both its load at constant speed and to its speed at any load,
had not been developed, there would never have been any real carburetor problem. The wide variations in number and size of cylinder, with their corresponding changes in suction pulsations added
to the variations of flow rate due to both load and speed, make the
problem a real and difficult one. Without the present-day necessity
of constant mixtures, not only for stationary engines requiring close
speed regulation at all loads, to be secured only by throttle governors
imposing widely nrying flow rates on their carburetors, but also for
transportation engines of the marine, railroad, automobile, tractor,
and aero clas es, requiring wide variations in both speed and torque,
with correspondingly wide variations in carburetor-flow rates without changing the mixture proportions, the carburetor would undoubtedly have remained a chamber with two fixed or adjustably
fixed holes, one for fuel and one for air. Such a thing as a carburetor is quite useless for variable flow service even with a fuel of
constant physical properties used at a constant altitude or barometric
pressure and under constant air and fuel temperatures. Eliminating
these last factors, there still remains a problem of very considerable
magnitude and great difficulty, the design of variable flow-proportioning carburetors, and no better illustration of this difficulty can
be found than the complexity and lar<Ye number of the patents on the
subject, on the one hand, coupled with the still present operator's
difficulties with the commercial products of the present day, on the
other.
All the cases from class 4 to class 14, inclusive, are concerned with
various means of establishing and maintaining the proportionality

172

ABRON AUTICS.

in variable-flow carburetors without any effort at automatic control
or correction for densities or fuel viscosities, to which subject but
little attention has as yet been paid, as is indicated by the few cases
of class 15. The effort to solve the problem of the proportioningflow carburetor used with varying-flow rates is more or less logically
analyzed by the new class groupings with their various subclasses,
all of them starting with the now well-known assumption of fact,
that no single fixed fuel inlet and single fixed air inlet will suffice,
the ratio of fuel to air increasing regularly or irregularly with increase in flow rate in such a structure.
To correct this tendency toward an i~creasing percentage of fuel
in the mixture with increasing flow rates, structural modification of
the two simple fixed inlets is necessary, and these modifications are
divisible into two groups. It is clear that once the mixture has become overrich after an increase in flow r ate, the original proportion
can be restored, first, by reducing the vacuum at the fuel outlet
through an increase of the air inlet by a graduating valve or a
movement to a point of less velocity, or by reducing the pressure on
the fuel surface in the constant level cup, or in general the net :fuelflow head, and, second, by r educing the area of the fuel inlet by a
graduating lalve. These two ways of compensation are typical of
the two broad group divisions-first, compensation by control of
fuel-flow head; second, compensation by control of fuel-flow area.
Of course, both may be utilized at the same tittle, and in anyone
carburetor many of the several different means of accomplishing both
are found operating simultaneously. It should be noted that the
primary or basic way of controlling fuel-flow head is by the air
vacuum at the fuel inlet without operating on the surface pressure
of the fuel in its constant level chamber, and this control of vacuum
at the fuel inlet to the carburetor is a matter of air-inlet valve area,
number and location of inlets, though subject to some control by
variations in internal position of fuel inlet or direction of the air
flowing past it. The fundamental basis of all proportionality control in carburetors is, therefore, one of structural arrangement of
fuel and air inlets, in number, location, and relative area adjustment,
corresponding to change of flow rates. This idea is incorporated in
the new classification where the several classes are distinguished
one from another by the number of fuel or air inlets and by the
presence or absence in them of a re<Yulating valve to adjust the flow
area of either. to the flow rates. Subclasses include either important
groups of special cases of the general class or cases of some additional means of fuel -pressure control above that afforded by the airinlet arrangements of the general class. For example, classes 3 to
10, inclusive, all have fixed, nonvarying fuel-inlet areas in any number associated in classes 3 and 6, inclUSIve, with any number of fixed
air inlets, and in classes 7 to 10, inclusive, with variable air inlets in
any number, the air-inlet graduating valve being actuated in different
ways in the several subclasses. Similarly, classes 11 to 14, inclusive,
are all cases of variable fuel-inlet areas, where fuel graduating
valves are used and actuated in the several subclasses in each of the
typical ways. These several classes of variable fuel inlets are associated in class 11 with fixed air inlets in any number, and in classes
12 to 14, inclusive, with variable air inlets, having graduating valves.

----------------------------------------------------------------------~

ABRON AUTIOS.

173

Within anyone class characterized by a specified number of air
and fuel inlets, fixed or variable, the subclasses will indicate additional or special means of fuel-pressure variation with flow as, for
example, float -chamber pres~ure control, which may be used with any
combination or kind of inlets; likewise, mixed flow or the admission
of a small amount of air to the fuel passage to break the vacuum to
the necessary extent, the air and fuel flowing together mixed. Again,
in each of the several classes of multiple fixed fuel inlets there may
be a subclass for the special form of the fuel standpipe in which
successive holes or outlets are brought into action as the vacuum increases somewhat equivalent to a varying fuel-inlet area, though
only as head increases and as a result of it. Finally, in the several
classes of multiple fuel there may appear subclasses representing
two or more complete carburetors, each of another simpler class all
the same, and brought into action successively t o limit the flow variation in anyone set of passages and thereby limit the necessity for
the other sorts of compensation that are necessary with wider variations of flow in one; 10 such carburetor units in one multiple carburetor would limit the flow variations in each member to one-tenth
as much as in a single similar one for a given total range of flow
rates.
With this introduction on the general problem and plan of investigation of the efforts of inventors to solve it, as disclosed in the patent art, the several new classes and subclasses will be examined
separately.
Olass 1, carburetors, proportioning flow, fixed air aiui fuel inlets,
pe'riodic fuel valve.--This is the early developed class of carburetors
designed to convert a gas engine into a gasoline engine by an almost
identical device, smaller in proportion to the relative volumes of
gasoline to gas for the same amount of air, and primarily intended
for hit-and-miss stationary engines requiring no graduation of flow,
and for pressure supplies of fuel, that require a shut-off valve to
stop the flow between suction strokes. When this stop valve is
open, the flow effect is that of a fixed fuel passage. This fuel valve,
with or without a corresponding air valve, may be actuated in any
one of several ways to be noted, primarily adapted to reasonably
low-speed engines, and normally to a single cylinder, or to one such
carburetor per cylinder.
One early case of a fuel valve actuated by an air-flow impact disk,
movement of which does not affect the area of the air-flow passage,
is shown on page 175 (581,930, May 4,1897, Alderson), which illustrates the idea of alternative use in a similar way, of gas and gasoline, because a gas inlet is also provided with its own valve to be
opened by the vacuum directly because it is large enough. This
case also illustrates a different means of fixing and adjusting the
fuel inlet area by limiting the lift of the fuel valve, the shoulder of
which strikes the end of an adjustable sleeve. In this case the fuel
is discharged into a freely open portion of the air inlet where the
vacuum is negligible and the gooseneck fuel-supply pipe rising above
the fuel valve indicates the intention to use a pressure supply of
fuel under at least this much head. An air-flow disk located at the
throat of a double-tapered air passage with another such disk on
the same stem at the large diameter point immediately above it,

----------------------------- --------------------------------~

174

- --

---

AERON AUTICS.

to produce the double effect of a prompt lift of the fuel valve formed
at the end of the stem, and to spatter the fuel so it may mix with
the air in the irregular passage, is the construction illustrated on
page 176 (584,666, June 15, 1897, Bonee) . Not only is this case interesting because of the construction but also because the patent is
for a " motor vehicle," and is one of the early constructions of this,
at the time, very new art. While the fuel valve is located in front
of the air-inlet valve and is, therefore, subjected to none of the
-vacuum due to air-entrance resistance, it is nevertheless, by reason
of the air-passage taper, subjected to the vacuum of the air velocity
bead, and the case is one of the very early examples of the use of
velocity-head vacuum to influence fuel flow.
As showing the use of a pressure supply of fuel, the case on page
177 (611,341, ept. 27, 1898, Starr & Cogswell) is interesting, because
the elevated chamber is shown feeding the tubular fuel valve, the
seat of which is lifted off by the entrance air valve beyond. As the
fuel flows down it meets the air rising, but evidently complete
vaporization was not regarded as assured, because a drainpipe is
provided joining the cup overflow.
Location of a fuel valve on the supply side of an automatic air
check valve is also illustrated on page 177 (688,367, Dec. 10, 1901,
Tregurtha), which also shows a broad enlal'/~ement below the fuel
inlet, over which the measured amount of ruel is intended to be
evaporated by the air, a thing that could not be done at all with
present-day gasoline. A contrary fuel flow arrangement with the
same location of fuel valve on the supply side of the air check is
shown on page 177. Here the fuel flows down with the air toward the
cylinder. (703,937, July I, 1902, Lizotte.) Use of a pistQn type of
air valve to actuate the fuel valve is shown on page 178 (705,021, J uly
22, 1902, Bennett & Morewood) to avoid the difficulty of simultaneously making tight an air check and a rigidly attached fuel valve.
A similar purpose is served by the spring of 703,937, July 1, 1902,
Lizotte. Actuation of the fuel valve by the vacuum directly is
shown on pages 177 and 178 (705,314, July 22, 1902, Blake), the
diapraghm C rising with the vacuum and opening the fuel valve.
This case also illustrates the use of primary and secondary air
through two separate air inlets.
An illustration of a form especially adapted to the hit-and-miss
engine is given on pages 178 and 179 (722,672, Mal. 17, 1903, Burger),
where a governor controlled pawl carried on a sleeve about the all'
valve stem opens or does not open the fuel valve.
Direct attachment of the fuel valve to the main en¥ine inlet is
shown on page 179". (724,328, Mar. 31, 1903, Pivert.) Another case
of air impact disk actuating the fuel \alve is shown on page 179
(747,235, Dec. 15, 1903, Saris) in connection with two other interesting features, one, the constant level float chamber, the level in which
is above the fuel valve, making the valve necessary, and the other,
the hollow stem of the fuel valve, which accumulates fuel between
suction strokes, discharging the accumulation with whatever comes
past the regular needle valve. This is a sort of forerunner of the
now common accelerating cup of modern carburetors that accumulates fuel durina- periods of low engine demand, discharging it
quickly on a sudden increase in demand due to the opening of the
thJ'ottle at a time when the mixture would otherwise tend to become
lean by reason of the greater inertia of the fuel over the air.

•

AERONAUTICS.

010 Model.)

G. ALDERSON.
GAS MIXER .

No. 581,930

Patented May 4, 1897.

175

176

AERONAUTICS •

. .. &lI,lIt.

... . BOLLEE. FILS

. ",,"_Uutt.

MotU VUIOLt.
l!~

581.0lI0.

Pa\.tnh4

JUDe

15, lS07 .

..z;,.-/eA~

"""rib.

..z;-'TU'
n.
...,. ... :. .,/77,,.....,....

hI~fod-r

).. BOLLtE . rILS.

A. BOLUE. FIL8.

NOTO lnllaL!'.

" OlOln"
stoLE.

Pituh4 June 15, l8Q7.

No. 5IUIG.

No.)iSI ,I~I .

ht al1tedJuu 16,1897.

n«,' _
.

.. . .
.
"

\'

.

~
."

~~
. "r,c.,. ,

:#~,
,JI. *,~

~,

•

177

AERONAUTICS•

... _I.Ut.

t . W IrUt ..
.
. 1111, '"

.",'OIUIi

",, '~1,U7

'&,u,"

SUi. H.I U &'

J. H. CO uwctl.

'0. UHO,IVt II 'I U I.

"" ".117

8. t , TII[(iUU M
A.

ht~"D'L IO."OJ.

'ItuUi'I.fy I,flat,.
~.

luonE.

F C.lut.

~. t

c

JJ1#r

Q2:i'~~
72805°- S. Doc. 559, 64-2-- 12

" ,.. 'd'II, 22,1901.

178

AERONAUTICS •

r, C. IlAIL

. ... '0$,021

hiNt •• hi, 22, 1101.
J. ' , IUIf[TT &. If. ' . aonWO O .
D

... tOl,tt\.

t."

,. t.~ . 'I", 22,1"1.
'[lU11 & II. t . • 00 •• 000.

unull'''.

PJ.T[~ttD

J •. nU1l
"HIU!l "

J,i.9

1111.1.. 1'. un

L.F. BtlJOtlt.
VlLVt POI au tNOIHts.
Il~"

" '. 11,

un

4'

8Y~

179

AERONAUTICS.

... "u"

L.

r. Ulan.

unIT£» !Ul.lt lto1.

P1ttntD Wll. 31. Ito!.

, .. 1J4 ,na.
III , PJVtJT.

'ALVE r O ou t H
I
oIn• .

1C 111"0 U LVC PO I tlPLOIIOlf ["Olll'&!.

UrLl .. " UlllU " ' U . lOll

. , nIUTI • • rlUOn n

]f., 7t7,2S&'

Jo . u u.

UTuno DtC.l~.
J.a.SAIUS.
ClBSOJltTtarORLlOUJO r OtL tN OIN tI.

• • IMI

nos.

''' U h T,orfl~U .''. II , II ''

:W', 7Io,In.

'h UliTtD IiI .lT u" n o.:
III. d, "Bitt,. o. c. DOIJU.
\'&'OIl.12[R rOR ClPLOSlVt IHOINE!.
nUlh11f1 'I~U" " II.ltlil.

t

"

~
iT.c'H...s~~

ry . ~~>:.'"7'

>

----~--- ---

180

-

---

--- -----~

AERON AUTICS.

The use of a fan type of air motor as an air impact device to lift
the fuel valve is illustrated on page 179 (760,673, May 24, 1904, White
& Duryea), the fan or motor also serving as a mixer. Adjustment
of proportions in those cases so far illustrated has been provided by
a needle valve before the fuel inlet valve or by limiting the lift of
the inlet valve, but the same result may be obtained by adjusting the
air as shown on page 181. (761,392, May 31, 1904, OIds.) Here
the use of pressure supply of fuel is clearly indicated by the tank
le,el, and the air inlet is provided with an area adjusting slide to
control the amount of air that shall enter each stroke with the fixed
amount of fuel. The same idea of control by the air, but by an
interestinj(T form of air damper, the iris, is shown on page 1 1.
(793,498, une 27,1905, Ash.)
Direct vacuum actuation of the fuel ,-alve, independent of the air
flow except as it may be the cause of the vacuum, is shown on page
181 (820,408, May 15, 1906, Garllus) , where the vacuum acting on
one side of the disk and atmosphere on the other, lifts it and the fuel
va he. A pivoted or swing type of air-flow disk to actuate the fuel
vahe is shown on page 1 1 (850,223, Apr. 16, 1907, Hallett), a form
that should be very sensiti,e to air movements and sure to open fully
each time. A form in which the check valve that actuates the fuel
yalve does so by an indirect connection is shown on page 182 (999P33,
July 25, 1911, Hubbard), where a lever permits relative lifts about
in proportion to the two val,e diameters, which is not possible with
direct axial connection, except by making the period of opening of
the air val,e greater than that of the fuel valve. A ball used as the
fuel valve and lifted by the 'mcuum directly is shown on page 182
(1,004,091, Sept. 26, 1911, Shain), and a similar use of direct vacuum
on a flat-faced val,e is shown on page 182 (1,120,397, Dec. 8, 1914,
Martin). An intere ting case of indirect fuel introduction is shown
on page 182 (1,044,314, Nov. 12, 1912, Watson), where the fuel is
discharged into a side pocket with an air passage by passing the
spring-loaded inlet valve. This passage would tend to lift the fuel
promptly abo,e that valve, better than if it were deli,ered to a lowvelocity main air stream, especially if the check val,e is heavily
loaded. That this old and simple class of device i still a subject of
invention is illustrated by the case on page 1 3 (1,151,156, Aug. 24,
1915, Bingaman), where a simple air-flow di k cau es a fuel valve
to lift in front of the air, or in this case, the mixture-inlet yalve,
here used as the entrance to the closed crank case of a small two-cycle
engine.
SubcZassl.1-FueZ valve operated by engine valve gear.-Probably
the oldest of the class of fuel val,es directly operated from the ,al,e
gear, independent of the air or mixture valves, and under the control of a hit-and-miss governor, is that on page 184 (433,806, Aug. 5,
1890, Otto), which case is of peculiar interest, in view of the pioneer
work of this now famous in,entor, Otto, a contemporary and riyal
of the equally famous Korting. One other case will serve to illustrate
this subclass as it is of such limited value in its bearing on the general problem, that on pages 1 4 and 185 (574,183, D ec. 29, 1896, Underwood), where by the one cam-actuated arm, the main inlet valve
is lifted, and at the time a gas, and a gasoline fuel valve as well.

181

AERONAUTICS.

I ..

UI.'n.

1'&Tt1IttD lUt aI, ltD{.
•• t.OLD,.

. '. 715,4" .

bl.J!lI'l n n roR £ULOIlOK CIfGrlCl.
HH1IUI. . ,nIlH III ',lffl• •

UURnD JUM& 27. ]Ill.\.
1. LoUB.
OnlltlltTtR rOI IItDIOOUJOM tHOUI£!.
U'U'UI' _. rl~U In. I . '"''

1'...... oJ. ..
,1f. ....... _£ OJ"'
~

• •. "0.4(11

PATtlfTtO lUI U,
I . GULL".
VJ,POII1l 1P1 0Dt VICtrollllu.",LCOIIIIOSfIOltM01JlltJ.

no. .

1 ,,160,'' ''

W
.t.BJ.LLm.

~"H" Tl" ' IU'IIUII. LI"

CUaOItUI.
IrrUU fl . . l un 1n..1.

~.
lD

iL

pJ.nJun J.P!. n.

10".

1101,

182

ABRON AUTICS.

.onn

t.l1InUD,

C. D-IUIlf. ,

'''IlI In?Lt fUln.

OWCUTD 1"111 hi

i" ~I'"I''''U''&'. II, U'''

999.033.

U~IJtI.

HHIUf'" rlr.u aU " , 1011 .

h1erIt.d.8ep'-21,1.lL

1.004.091.

~:
.~
a""," .. to ~
,r4..

t . I.. lhlTllf.

.". ~4,;.r

r.c. w. sor
n

1.1 20.397.

Pa~D.t.ed NIn',

1.044.314.

e

7JwwuuArf/,vrJ>;bAiJr~~4~j, .

1.2.10It

183

AERONAUTICS.

w. O.

li'UiA_AIII.

W. O I'''C;'IU,Jt.
.

CAI,utlll,
.,.... .:~ ., .. ....... ".Ul ..

PitebiedAQI.

l,lGl,lG6.

..

~. 19IL

t N I ......."" .

""i!J.B.

~"

fl
...,..""","·~ J? _ -"

~~r. .,~~

...

~-

184

AERONAUTICS.

" . . . . . l.)

N. 1. OTTO.

N. 1 . OTTO.

M TOI &101,1& 'I'OIlIO It O npo l.
O
IL

WOTO. tIIOI" wonCD IT OIL VUOI.

No. 433.808.

"'··"1.1

Patented A'Il,. 5, 1800.

1 . . · hl.J
.

N. 1. OTTO.
"0101 !lO
llt lI on u If (IlL ""'01.

1'• . 433.805.

Patentecl

No. 433.808.

!"c. 6•..1890.

Patented Aug. 6. 18GO.

F. II . UNDERWOOD.

185

AERONAUTICS.

CI · . ..... '

r

r . 101: UNDERWO OD.

101. UNDERWOOD .

1111£1

Xlltl rOI au tIOlJ'tI.

roJ. UI £110111£1.
P,tu.ted D,o , 29, )8915 .

No.. 57«,183.

No. 674.183.

, . . . ... 1
.)

r. 14. UNDERWOOD.
KIln rOJ ou &MOlllU.

lfe.67C,183,

~q'e-.........£(
~\i!-..-d/,

PUnted 0'0. 29, 1998 .

P'tlntei 0'0.29, 18ge.

r. 101. UNDUWOOD .

WllU rol ou nO lln.

No. 674.183.

P,tent • • D,o . 29, 1896.

186

AERONAUTICS.

Subclass 1.~-Fuel inlet in seat of automatic air inlet valve.-The
idea of this arrangement in this class is to insure an adequate air
velocity past the fuel inlet when it opens to carry the fuel and prevent it dropping back, but there may be some difficulty in making a
broad seat of a conical air check valve close tightly an appropriately
small fuel inlet, and even as much so with flat seats. The earliest
case of this subclass, perhaps also the earliest of the whole general
class, and one that attained commercial success is that on page 189
( 417 ,924, Dec. 24:, 18 9, Korting), in which the descent of the pi ton
opens tll<; air and fuel valves together, the fuel discharging into the
seat of the air valve for vigorous spraying. This inventor, Korting,
with Otto, may be said to have inaugurated the commercially successful business of building gasoline engines in their t"o riyal German establishments, still in existence and still successful. Association with a fuel inlet located in the seat of the air valve, of a heated
chamber, to permit the same proportioning structure to operate on
a heavy or nonvolatile fuel, and thus to convert a gasoline into an oil
engine, to use common terms, is illustrated on page 189. (523,511,
July 24, 1894, Campbell.) Here the fuel and air descend together
and strike a hot elbow where the oil separates out, becomes heated,
and being swept by the air, is vaporized. This case may be said to
have practically inaugurated the construction of that class of oil engine in which the mixture is made externally to, and not in the cylinder, by first proportioning fuel and air, and then heating the mixture
on its way to the cylinder. Another early form of this arrangement
is shown on page 189 (635,166, Oct. 17,1899, Hay), which also provides exhaust heat for the fuel and mixture entrance chamber . A
complete ring of fuel inlet holes is shown in the form on page 190.
(690,112, Dec. 31, 1901, Kul1.) Manun l adjustment of the fuel needle
.. alve simultaneously with the lift limit of the air check valve, is pro,ided on page 190 (722,357, Mar. 10, 1903, Davis), which, if connected to an outlet throttle, would become a pair of graduating valves
of quite different characteristics. A flat seat air check valve is shown
on pages 190 and 191 (894,656, July 28, 190 , Johnston), with an odd
sort of mixer, and a plug form of throttle. An annular form with
the fuel valve in the center of piston type of air check is illustrated
on page 191. (922, May 18, 1909, Wright.) The fuel is admitted
through the interior of a hollow air check with a hollow stem on
page 191. (948,977, Feb. 8, 1910, Kingsbury.) A case of flat seat
annular air check valve is shown on page 192 (995,919, June 20, U}11,
Smith), in connection with a fuel float chamber, where the fuel inlet
is a type of device originally designed and normally used for pressure supplies of fuel.
A gravity swing check with a fuel inlet in its stem is illusted on
page 192 (1,048,518, Dec. 31, 1912, Fritz), intended to be used with
aspirating fuel flow as a separate idling jet to be attached to any form
of carburetor and to come into action when the throttle is closed.
This is an excellent illustration of the way in which old forms of devices or appliances may find new uses or be revived in new combinations. Three separate fuel inlets in the air check-valve seat, one
for gasoline, one for kerosene, and a third for water, are illustrated

AERONAUTICS.

187

on pages 192 and 193 (1,156,836, Oct. 12, 1915, Diener), in connection
with an exhaust heated vaporizer, for an engine to be started on
gasoline, and when heated operated on kerosene, the water being
added to control preignitions.
Subclass 1.3-Fuel inlet located beyond automatic ai?' inlet.-One
early case (500,401, June 27, 1893, Lehman), shown on page 194,
attaches the fuel valve to a spring-closed poppet air-inlet valve by a
yoke with a flexible element, the fuel inlet being located so that it is
acted upon by the vacuum which opens the air valve, so the fuel
valve must be affected correspondingly. This is in contrast to the
last subclass where the air velocity over its valve seat, and not the
vacuum beyond the seat, acts on the fuel inlet. The form shown on
page 194 (515,059, Feb. 20, 1894, Hoyt) illustrates the use of a slide
valve for the fuel, actuated by the automatic air valve. The location
of the tank clearly indicates a pressure fuel supply. A swing air
check that strikes a separate spring-closed fuel vah'e is shown on
page 194 (567,253, Sept. 8, 1896, Pratt), and another swing check
striking a gravity and pressure closed fuel valve on page 1% (609,557,
Aug. 23, 1898, Phelps). That the point of mixture of fuel and air
may be controlled independently of the val ve locations is illustrated
on page 195 (616,974, Jan. 3,1899, Riotte), where, although the fuel
valve is formed on the end of the air-valve stem, the fuel meets the
air at a distant point, emerging in four streams at a contraction to
promote mixing. An independent fuel check acted on by the vacuum
developed beyond the automatic air valve is shown on page 195
(617,743, Apr. 9, 1901, White) in connection with a constant-level
chamber having an outlet below the level but sealed by a ball. Another case of a heater associated with proportioning fuel and air inlets
is that on pages 195 and 196 (619,776, Feb. 21,1899, Murray), in which
the air valve by a long extension of its stem opens a distant oil valve,
oil and air entering a heated annular pot at separate points, with the
idea of promoting vaporization of the oil and mixing of its vapor
with the air after the proportions have been established by the same
means commonly used for gasoline and air. Another independent
fuel check \alve. of swing type similarly located with reference to the
air check but above the level in an overflow chamber, so the fuel is
aspirated, is shown on page 196 (694,708, Mar. 4, 1902, White). A
lever connection between the automatic air valve and a fuel valve
located beyond it is shown on page 196 (1,066,080, July 1, 1913, Cole)
with a hand-adjusted needle valve. This is particularly interesting
because of its general similarity to another later class. If the fuel
valve were given a longer taper and the air valve were situated in a
long- tapered seat the flow areas of the two could easily be kept in any
deSIred ratio and proportionality be established with but little
vacuum change. Such cases are fairly numerous in the later classes
where the fuel is provided with a graduating valve controlled by an
lLutomatic air valve, main or secondary.
Subclass 1.J,., d01J,ble air inlet, one air inlet by-passes fuel inlet.This class is the forerunner of the very large class of primary and
secondary air inlets with its various combinations of valves and interconnections. Apparently the idea, at least at first, was that of

188

AERONAUTICS.

spraying and mixing rather than that of a compensatmg aITangement to correct for the tendency to become excessively rich in fixed
single air and fuel inlets, by admitting a secondary or diluting air
stream. In a patent granted for a "self-propelling carriage," a fuel
valve actuated by an air valve, makes what may be termed a primary
mixture, to which additional or secondary air may be admitted for
a manual adjustment of proportions, as shown on page 197. (610,460,
·' ept. 6, 1898, Pretot.) One early form, that on page 197 (679,387,
July 30, 1901, Mathieu), has a pair of air-impact disks by which the
fuel valve is actuated, air from one inlet strikes the top disk and
opens the fuel valve, the fuel being spread over the disk and sprayed
down from its edge in front of the second air stream. This may be
compared with the form on page 197 (715,398, Dec. 9, 1902, Longuemare), which is really intended to act in the compensating way, the
secondary air being admitted beyond the impact hood equivalent to
a disk, so that the fuel valve is lifted for a shorter period and fuel
admitted less, the more the secondary air. Secondary air acts, therefore, to limit the fuel lift somewhat, but not quite as would a mechanical stop, and its effect on proportioning is similar to that of a
fuel needle valve. In the form, page 198 (896,388, Aug. 18, 1908,
Johnston), part of the air passes directly up the center tube, exerting a velocity action at the fuel outlet and impinging on the fuel
valve lifting disk, while the rest of the air enters around the edge
of the automatic inlet valve, and has no influence in lifting the fuel
valve at all, but a mechanical stop to limit the lift is also used. The
fuel-air ratio is directly adjustable manually by the air by-pass, or by
the fuel needle, in the form page 198. (903,206, Nov. 10, 1908, Lawson.) A still closer approach to the automatic compensating action
of automatic secondary air is shown on page 198 (939,856, Nov. 9,
1909, Papanti), where the secondary air enters by an automatic valve.
This, by the removal of the fuel valve and attachment to a constant
level cup, would become one of the very large class of so-called automatic compensating cases of subclass 8.2. Indicating that carburetors
of this class are still being brought forward is the case on page 198
(1,181,514, May 2, 1916, Eynon), in which the fuel valve purpose is
not clear, because the flow is purely aspirating, but the perforated
box surrounding the fuel outlet is intended to assist in spraying and
mixing.
Class 93, carburetors, p1·Op01·tWni.tng flow, metering fuel pump, airmotO'T' driven. -For many years before the advent of the gasoline
engine and the need in connection with it of suitably small, cheap,
and accurately proportioning carburetors that would not leave heavy
fractions as unusable residues the art of gas making had been pretty
considerably developed, and in connection with it a very larO'e number of evaporative carburetors. Some of these had fuel-feed valves
more or less relating the control of fuel flow to that of air flow, but
the great majority, substantially all of them, maintained a body of
liquid either in bulk or spread over solid, porous, or fibrous surfaces,
from which evaporation took place, the proportions being established
by the evaporative conditions rather than by the conditions of feed
and flow . From this, however, has come in a more or less logical

189

AERONAUTICS.

METHOD

or

. No.4.17,924

l! CAMPBELL

E KORTING
Pateuttd. Doo. 24,1 889

Patolltod July 24, 189( ,

No. 523.611.

_,.o. r~3'

~
-. ~

.£

."~.",,

~
;t kJ •••...•,

H CAlIPBEtL:
Patented July 24, 189 4.

o

W!TN:ES5E.S:

~

-

0

11 .. &35,1"

OlLtlfOlNt.

N.o. 623.511

tllutU;--lhnl .

OIL£IiOU& •

AUTO IIUTI O I OlCIT101i HI OJ.1 tlfO llftl.

~

B

.._- .........- ,
VI. HAY

"'OIIlU,O'U,U"NU

190

AERONAUTICS.

V.. 'IO,Irt.

, .. 1"',U1.

--- ...
ol. L lULL

~" 'UIt1lt '" al"" Ul'n ,ttl lin,.,.*,

-..

UftlTB MiL 10, ItOs.

... .. D,TtL

1'1"''''-

CdlDlnU rol au tJGll't•.
..,ruu" .. rlUl' ....... ~ t_

.TJIS..:f.

Jt. 114 ,'51.
J .JO!5~O!l.

C.uJD'ltrtlt TOI JlfTtR!U.L COIUUaJON tMOllftS.
",Uutl .. u~u

au"I"'.

191

AERON AUTICS.

UrtlTtI) .mI.! 21. 1t0l,
1. JOIJIITOlf.
CUJtlltTtI FOI JII'TUH.lL COKlOITIO If tIfOlUI.

•,r""Tt..

IHU

".u. U"~

UTtrt ttl nLT U.190'

J •. UU~··
CUIUItTtJ

roa

" JOl1'lnoll
INTtltlfAL COltUOiTlON ENOBlts.

.,n, .. ".. IIlU

I~" ~

IN •

0 . lV. "'ll(HlT.

• un In 'UJoUUa.

" , '.1I1l0Slo n .

U HI. .JlU "Ut t u. 10. 11111.

948,97 7.

PltRted FtlI.l.1910'

~----------------------------------------------------------------

192

--

-

--

AERONAUTICS.

L t . rUtz.

c. unT!.
CA U nnu.

,

h l _ tlO DU lCIE to. Ot.UIlltTtJ&,

•

." UU1IU

41 'I.lUnt " Hu , U . .. lIl"

1 , 1~e .8 3e .

Dillin.
""UI1C _,

~>Ul

..· ,III. "·.I,"H

~"

Ula.

C. H, OIHI ( R.

C~ ",

..

,nn UI

1,048,1
118.

99~.919.

h tented'OcL12, 19t.\.

• .. tI'_ou,'

Pa~ttd

OcL 12, 191.&.

.'.un..... " ••.

193

AERON AUTICS.

•
C. H DIENER.
.
CI.IIIIUJI(t(lI.
Al" UUT IOI IIHocin, I'"

1,156.836.

Patented Oct 12.

19~

1 SM
IIJJ-IMtU J '

~:-

72
15"
~;"' •.u.w,.

71

~"" . ~
4. . .p #-1

72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2-13

;-

C.H .DIENEfI

194

AERONAUTICS.

r

J. LtB1U.Mft .

KIlJ.a ULYI: rOlltTlOLttlM 01 OTlti W
OTOI

No. 600,401

PatlDudJuo 21, 1893.

G t Ron

C.lIIOltTilfO .. ,,,urtrl r OJ hI all • H OA tlOHrU

No. 615,050

Pl.lented reb 20.1894.

,

z

J PUTT
J PU 1T
U' OlfZU dD iI:I1t1 rOI OJ,lOLtn: &)(OHI'£L

No. 567 ,2.53

hhnhd "pt. 8, 1890.

' . ,O
.IU . .... O Kiita rO l a.-OLElt t)fOllfti.

No 615 7253

. '-

Sept. 8, 1890.
~l

195

AERONAUTICS•

••. 'M,'S)

... CI.,,,,-

W II 'HEln
"" ... IU'OIIlYOUU'U.OIU.

- -

, c. , . IIIOTT[
.U'UI.!.

.... ..

,-~

CARL C, RIOTTE

ii:l1',n•

..

<S
~

'NVtNTOR
Cu"RCttc'CQ ~'Tc..

.Y~
~I,O "'f'TO"'NCY~

IlIvtMTO
R'

196

AERONAUTICS •

......ncr

_

, .g
........
U,U&lIL
.... ..

c. O• • MllL

--

""O.IIU'UU'lOIIU ,.lIlU.

.... _.p.., ... _
~&- b
J

.. :.......

"',

Fig . .3 .

Fig.z.
fit,.ve-rdozo;

"'000l!I

h 'ult••• , t . ttOz.
t . O WllIll

z

.liJiff. .L .
H1"
flfruu •

..: £' ~.L..-...,..
~.u...._.

C=O.~.

.B.Y~~

r. r. COLt.

197

AERONAUTICS •

.,tl'''OHltl.CUUIUL

"'. _ _ ....... '-J

-_ ............

ilL' UOHlllllC

U"~I.U.

"\

\

/

/
./

~ , ". LU;UUORE

'111I'''D .. ' . I'02,.

--- ... - .

CAUUUTU '0. U:~lUln n'"lL

F"IC_~

t
-

198

...

-

AERONA.UTICS,

iJ.O.UUSO"
tnmo"J.~
UTU . UI.,"U . ....... , _

I . G. 19JOiSTOJ..
CUlllltftL
"" ~IU"U fJ~1t ~ ....

P&te!:ItedNO'f lo.lD

u...P"

LUU/CTI.

G,I,(YN O'"

eUlC'lt'fh.

CUI~~tlU.

."~I .. TI.. IlL .. " " . .. , ...

,', .. ,M. KI

1,181,514.

939,856.

~Po/';;;'­

... ~#~
--.

~ ., ,,'

PlloeOted )(112.1916.

AERONAUTICS.

199

sequen ce the first of the proportioning-flow carburetors of the airdriven, fuel-volume meter type, shown on page 201. (249,363, Noy.
8, 1881, Jackson.) An ordinary gas meter acts as an air motor to
drive a fuel meter consisting of a rotating plate with pockets on its
face, the pockets filling as they pass a fuel chamber and emptyin&" as
they pass a port leading into the metered air stream. All the tuel
is thus measured and proportioned to the air flowing with it as
volumetrically proportioned mixture. The first case of this class
designed directly for engine use where the bulk and cost of the old
standard form of bello"s gas meter would be prohibitiye is that on
page 201. (791,801, June 6, 1905, Leinau.) This has some of the
characteristics of the aspirating jet type of structure. The float
chamber, with its fuel passage and fuel outlet above the chamber
leyel, are the same as would operate in the ordinary aspirating manner, except that the jet is located fairly high and in a region of low
air velocity, as also is the air passao-e. There are added two new
elements-first, a small centrifugal ftlel pump in the fuel passage,
and, second, an axial-flow fan-blade form of air motor in the path
of the entering air, driving the pump. There is a suggestion, in
view of the more or less frequent use of such fanlike motors as
stirrers and mixers, that this is the primary idea here, though reliance is placed on the pump action to eject the fu el. The case is interesting rather for its suggestiveness than for its direct nIue, because the floow-speed pressure characteristic of the pwnp and air
motor of these forms are not such as well maintain proportionality.
Another form invohing the same elements, but in which the centrifugal pump fuel pas ages di charge radially directly into the air instead
of through a jet nozzle, as in the previous case, is shown on page 202.
(957,976, May 17, 1910, Lucas.) A more directly proportioning arrangement based on volumetric displacements is that on page 202
(1,048,083, Dec. 24, 1912, Lavender), in which a rotary volume
meter of the form common in the measurement of water is used as
air motor and drives a pair of plunger fuel pumps. If the lip of
these two displacers were exactly the same, and if there were no
density variation in the ail' to cause variations in the weight of air,
even when its volume is correctly proportioned to the fuel, this arrangement would seem to offer good prospects, at least as good as
most of the direct-jet aspirators, as a proportioner. Of course there
"Will be some unfavorable inertia lag elements to interfere with
prompt acceleration of a variable-speed engine, and once it is operating at high speed the inertia of the moving parts of the proportioner will continue fuel delivery after the throttle is closed. Furthermore, the size of the apparatus must necessarily be large, as the
speed of a gasoline pump can not be high, but the arrangement is
truly one of the proportional-flow class.
A similar rotary meter type of air motor driving a gear form of
fuel pump by friction disks to secure a suitable ratio for adj ustment
of proportions is shown on pages 202 and 203. (1,119,479, D ec. 1,
1914, Veeder.) There is also added a diaphragm form of fu el needle
control to adjust the inlet automatically with change of speed, so as to
keep the pump delivery pressure nearly constant. A late form of the
centrifugal fuel pump driven by an air motor of the turbine dass is
shown on page 203 (1,137,238, Apr. 27, 1915, Sherman), the rotor

200

AERONAUTICS.

being mounted on ball bearings directly above the float chamber and
the pump consisting primarily of a curved disk concave upward
with an orifice restncted entrance. Still a different form involving
an impulse form of air motor is shown on page 203 (1,149,323, Aug.
10, 1915, Baker & Swan), where an automatic intake valve of the
swing-check type is employed as an air-entrance nozzle to direct the
air to the motor vanes at approximately constant velocity as the
intake gate varies. A gear type of fuel pump delivers the air to
the throat of an air-delivery venturi tu'be for spraying where, of
course, there will be a depression of pressure, helping to induce fuel
flow. Some air at high speed by-passes the spraying tube through
swing checks, tending to keep the delivery velocity through the
spraying throat approximately constant.
Class 3, carbu1'etors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single-fixed
fuel and air inlets .-Nothing simpler than this structural arrangement for a proportioning fl ow carburetor could well be conceived, soit
is quite natural to find many efforts to devise arrangements which
by reason of their details or dimensions might be made to work
satisfactorily enough for at least some sorts and sizes of engines.
One of the early cases, page 20:1: (622,274:, Sept. 19, 1899, Riotte),
has a constant level chamber of the overflow type and a fuel passage
branching beyond the needle vahe to four orifices for mixing purposes, the whole chamber being doubled for direct bolting to the
two intake ports of a two-cylinder stationary engine. A different
form of constant-Ieyel cup of overflow type is shown on page 204:
(658,267, Sept. 18, 1900, Kennedy), constructed somewhat like a
plumbing trap) and still another form on page 205 (682,596, Sept.
17,1901, Aldnch), which has in addition a plug form of fuel adjusting valve. Location of the fuel nozzle in the center of a flo at
type of constant-level chamber to keep the fuel head constant in spite
of the titling that is a necessary part of transportation sen-ice is shown
on pages 205 and 206 (6 5,993, Nov. 5, 1901, Le Blon) , in which the
nozzle is axially situated in a straight portion of a cylindricn'! air
passage, air and fuel flowing in the same direction, the air passage
being provided with a manually adjusted restricted inlet. Cross
flow is illustrated on page 206 (724,64 ,Apr. 7, 1903, Zimmermann),
the fuel needle vahe stem crossing a straight air passage at right
angles and being carried in a cage that r estricts air flow. Another
such crossing fuel valve stem is shown on page 206 (729,647, May
26, 1903, "White), arranged, however, in a bend, so the air passes the
fu el inlet at an angle and, by reason of the obstructions, with many
eddy currents. Location of a fuel heater 'between the fuel-measuring
nozzle and the point of mixture with the air at which the fuel flowinducing vacuum originates is illustrated on page 206. (804,589,
Nov. 14,1905, Enrico.) This fuel nozzle, of the multiple-outlet form,
discharges over a series of heated tubes, where its fuel is to be
vaporized in its own atmosphere. Of course the heating develops
some expansion, which has a similar influence to flow r esistance, and
if the heat were variable there would be a variation of proportions
due to it alone, independent of other influences. A curious form of
fuel passage, made crooked for the purpose of resisting excessive
increases of fuel flow, is shown on page 207. (846,903, Mar. 12,
1907, Bradbeer.) On page 207 (936,337, Oct. 12, 1904, Maybach) is

201

AERONAUTICS.

_
.......
W III. H CRSON

W.

1(.

JACXBOK.

!IItTlIIC£J. c UliDll n OI

no. 24 Q, 3fJ l

Piltented No'f 8.1881.

.~ '

n'

5t.::;7~
/I % '~T

'>r-=r."

~,

.T,.. ·u'",~#"

~--"--::-""--=--...:..: "'.?~.......

~ (;> »< :4~.u-

~e"",.~",-- •

.~

W III J ACKSON
KtT!lICAL CARBURETOR.

11 0.249.363.

7r~."''''••

.;iI.c._-<-JJ~N'·e..r

Plolenud NOT . e, 1881.

~

. .. "','01.

PHtHrI:D 10N£ I.
' !f.ttl N.lD .
CUBOlltTtR rOB BTDI004810K IitlOnft8.
urUUflU

n~u

I 'Ll II, IfM

ltos. .

202

AERONAUTICS.

(I, D. LO'C.lL

0.1>. LlIOU.

n OlillUl iUnauo.
.,,.,.. ,, .. tn" ' .. nt,l_

,'f'Q,IIlIDI

..u:n. . .

Pat6nted)(a, rtmll

967,976.

I.~

.... .

U'DTIl'tlIL

.,t~ I' U I"l ll.nll "".I""

htut.ec! lb7 17.11111

. 9~7,976 _

l----_----i-

J:.....;t;" .IIJ .n.u.-.,

... Av..~

1l~~1
CR . VttDtR.

I . LUUDtL
c.aunmlfODtflCt.
uHlht'lll ,w.u " ... I". U I U 'U ". h ,

1,048,083.

",I

Pal.ented Deo..24. 1912.

1,119.479.

'./'"

~~j
.Ji7'yT

203

AERONAUTICS.

C I!. nEon
.

W SK
.I, U""".

vr ~I~ . 'I01 fIU~" '

e. w. 8un, I"

" r\K,,,t. IIIU '" II."",

11. 10 '01.

SWAN.

t . W.

~"IU11/UO' ,1101_0 '~H 10 Oil I ~ GI '('"

' ''111.1''.'

tA~(II'

J I.

SW~N

""t .,,,,,.,,,.,

1, 149,323.

'"

N-t!-~1==:::2!.I~

204

AERONAUTICS.

",Ul,!74

... nun.

C. C IIOnt
.

C. t . IltIOfTr.

"IHh.S.,I. " , I'U;

U.'Ollz u' ....'tntu s.

' - - ' -''' - 1

_._----------._So

.n.9. T.

.J'I::9. 8 .

T C, UU(oY

t .... t •• I.,t.II, ltoO.

• .. 1$1.211.

_

t,uouu

....run.......
,-

U'IU

OIL HUU.

205

ARRONAUTICS.

· ht .. It • • •• 17, .. OL

t . .. W , "lOttlC".
.

..... un

, UIlOIi
~

CAUllun. ro.. ... .. . .. J _ _ a uL
n~lOlIU ,.
_

Ul'U.J"t!.-nf.Dw..

~.t~.

REldt:tch. ..,
~

UrJflat:un.

~~

7('d:d~,':..

~

....U .M).

t . U:.lOlf.
hUUIUU"'UPlU' U,UIUa.

..... , ... 1.

.........

r. Lf

hl .. h . . . . , S, I'Ol

' lO • .

tUI1IUU' , .. IIHOIlU " tin.,
.,b,.o.- .... _

. .. , ...

206

AERONAUTICS.

.......Hl

",'...14 .... 1. .....

' , U.lOlL

""n,N&.

P.l.tnttbUt.f.ltoL
I.. W
.
'lP'OlJIJllf'O IOA.lUarIEl.

zuncr:lvu.
...."I.Y.,to.'~I"'I.. Uft.

•""'fTu," """"'" ".UIU.

IIEi=:ei..oJY

...

ttt~.,.

I.O,' 1rItTt.

6 . liIiIOO.

nr1.Ol10lnotn.

OJ.JUlrnl 101 "'LOGor lforou.

u~u

UlUIU,,.I(l.I;Uau. .. - .

" 'U" ...f .

. ........

I....

wdne..-stN.

C?<>!'-~

k'~

207

~RONAUTICS.

umm lUI. U. UM

, .. 1CUtla

r.

UTt!TtD IU.I.

' ,IUDlttl,

r.Al!UDlttL
OUIOltTU•
ran 1"' . \1,

O.loJlOItTtL
..un.4",· UruDU.• , I • • _
n

Il"UUtltr

&• • . Dlon OIl.

r.M'YIAOB.

Q36,337.

n, ltQJ,

U'"

c.l.uonrn.

939.481.

Patented lW. 9, 1908.

J

~

208

AERONAUTICS.

•. sun.

C. III . ~-61uy.

1.171,200.

G M "OllN
. .

1.171,200.

AERONAUTICS.

209

another scheme f or modifying fuel exit by causing a continuous
circulation of fuel through the fuel nozzle in the direction of the
fuel exit, the overflow chamber being incorporated in the nozzle so
there is always some velocity head of fuel, contributing to the ~uel
flow, in addition to the air-flow vacuum.
.
I n all the cases so far the vacuum at the fuel inlet is due mainly
or exclusively to an entrance resistance and flow resistance up to the
fuel nozzle and not to any particular velocity head conditions, due
to contractions of passage or to bends and baffies. On page 207
(939,481, Nov. 9, 1909, Dickson) the fuel nozzle is located in a
curved elbow and the air will tend to crowd away from the jet more
in proportion as its velocity is higher , so that the vacuum due to air
velocity, independent of entrance resistance, will not increase at the
fuel inlet as fast as the air flow itself does. This is a sort of corrector for the tendency toward excess recliners or increased flow. An
indication of the recent, though as yet feeble, tendency to study the
flow laws of passages of different forms and to develop flow passages
that have suitable flow laws that contribute to proportionalitY 'is the
peculiar fuel passage and nozzle on page 208. (1,160 ,662, Nov. 16,
1915, Slaby.) The perforated rose head may be so formed as to give
quite a range of control of liquid flow yacuum at the top of the
vertical tube, by location and size of the holes, and the baffies in the
fuel passage may likewise sene as a means of control of the fuel
flow law with reference to the effective vacuum, of course, each within
suitable limits. Two fu els, each with its own float chamber and adjustably fixed fuel passage, discharge alternately to the same fuel
nozzle by the turning of a central switch valve in the form on page
208 (1,171,200, Feb. 8, 1916, Holley) intended for engines starting on
gasoline and later operated when hot on kerosene.
Subclass 3.1-Fuel inlet at air throat.-Contraction of the air passage walls in the manner used in injectors and compressed air spray
nozzles but applied to aspirating flow is illustrated on page 211.
(350,769, Oct. 12, 1886, Ragot & Smyers.) As here applied it delivers the mixture in whatever proportions the form and dimensions
make possible to a heated pot for vaporization, so that the engine
may operate as an oil engine on heavy fueL This is another one
of that class of oil engines developed from the gasoline engine by the
addition to the latter of a mixture heater. Placing the fuel inlet at
a restriction in the air passage or air throat or choke tube makes fuel
flow primarily dependent on the air velocity head rather than entrance
restriction, as illustrated on pages 211 and 212 (693773, Feb. 18, 1902,
Bardwell), an axial parallel flow arrangement, and on page 212
(789,537, May 8, 1905, Growville & Arguembourg) a cross-flow
arrangement, but without a fuel valve stem crossing the air passage.
Such a throat arrangement of curved form where the fuel vahes do
cross is shown on page 212 (906,980, Dec. 15,1908, Winton & Anderson), in which the air tends to beat against the fuel inlet, restricting
its flow as the air velocity increases more than if the flow were
parallel or than for plain cross flow, thereby tending to correct their
fuel flow excesses at high rates. As the fuel inlet is submerged a
pool will form , which on a sudden increase of air flow will be picked
up and carried along aiding acceleration, so this is one form of
72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2- -14

210

AERONAUTICS.

accelerating cup. A rather good form of air passage, practically a
venturi tube, by reason of the small angle of the discharge cone,
and having parallel axial flow, as shown on page 213 (954,905, Apr.
12,1910, Wolf), which is also provided with a heating jacket between
the float chamber and throat to promote vaporization. Heaters
located like this will affect the densities of the fuel and air, and the
viscosity of the former, and therefore change their proportionality
accordingly. To secure an initial flow inducing ,acuum of a given
fixed minimum value, from which the vacuum may begin to rise
instead of starting with zero with reference to flow rate, a light
gravity loaded check valve . striking a stop is used on page 213.
(1,038,699, Sept. 12, 1912, Wilkinson.) This is of special seI'Yice at
low-rate flow or on idling, but in no other way does it change the
proportionality characteristics of the other arrangements from what
they would be with a fixed air inlet of area equal to that available
"ith the air check valve open. Adaptation of the contracted throat
means of developing a localized vacuum to induce fuel flow to the
closed crank case form of two-cycle engine is illustrated on pages 213
and 2H (1,117,641, Nov. 17, 1914, Cottle), where the fuel inlet is at
the throat and the upstream wide end of the conical air passage is
connected to the top of the float chamber. In this way the fact
that the air is under a pressure greater than atmosphere m akes no
difference in the flow proportionality. It is a good illustration of
the fact that float chamber sur:face pressure equalization with the
air supply passage adapts practically any carburetor to the use of
compressed air, e,en though it were designed for pure aspiration
from the free atmosphere. The curved air throat with cross fuel
discharge and accelerating cup is illustrated again on page 214
(1,130,981, Mar. 9, 1915, Kingston), but with an additional element,
a low speed lifting tube for wet mixture. Around the steam of the
fuel adjusting valve a loose slee,e is placed, passing through the
di,iding wall, and through which the fuel and air will be lifted at
lo\\"-fl.ow rates by the h ad equivalent to the check ball. The lifting
will be assured at rates so low as would fail to lift the fuel in an
ordinary passage if, as is the case with most of the present day
gasoline, it resists prompt vaporization. An interesting form of
lifting tube passing directly through the center of a damper throttle
is illustrated on page 214: (1,190,714, July 11, 1916, Bottome), here
applied to a simple venturi throat carburetor of noncompensating
form, but evidently applicable to others.
Subclass 3J3-Air gwides or baffles.-The object of such baffles or
air guides is to correct the tendency for fuel to increase faster than or
just to mix the two. Arrangement of the air passage in the form of
a return bend with a small tube projection in each leg permits the
air velocity head to act positively at one and negatively on the other,
and connection of one above and the other below the fuel surface in
the closed constant-level chamber gives practically twice the flowjnducing pressure difference that is normally used. This is illustrated
on page 215. (660,482, Oct. 23, 1900, Bates.) Mixing is the object
of the helical baffle on page 216. (737,463, Aug. 25, 1903, Pearson.)
Formation of a spraying passage in the main air passage by baffies is
illustrated on page 216. (791,501, June 6, 1905, Richard.) Flow
correction, the former action, will undoubtedly take place in the form,

211

AERONAUTICS.

G. RiGOT '&. O. SMV.ERS.

s

n"I.Io_I~ .. 1

.

L

O. RAOO'!' & 0 SMYERS.
PErROttali ~fHI 01.1 Ol(170!.

PETBOLEOid AHDQU 1I0Toa.

No. 360.769.

Patented 00t..-12. 18Se.

a RAaOT & a SMYERS.

S'h.U-Ibt",.

l'&TROL£DM 'ltD OUlloro!.

No. 360.769.

Patented Oot. 12', I 1tS8.

!(o~

350,700.

"h.LI-jlh.' l

P'touted Oot.

fa. naG:!

212

AERONAUTICS .

.....,.m

A,

-

r • .uOWu'L

'lit ..,... 'd. It .

"ft

UJI\lIlU.IOJ 'n~o' ln ,UIU I
~

.... ...,-

OOl utl-<l.llU

.JI'! 9;2.
W/TNES3 C,s '

/NVENTOII$

~­

cl_'m-e...

i~"

• •• 1IM31

f£TI:ntD.UY'.lfO !.
1 . O'OO~tLtt' B. &lQO£llIlOUIO.
aTDMIZUIO 041111,,[11:1 rOil £1PL08IV& ElrOJIf&S.
""UG&t:.trl~II"~,,. I~.

~
"

.

. .

.'

~

. , .tIl1'O:I' R. t. ANDtL$DIl

",,""'"

U U,I.UIUrlu . . . .. . . I ....

906,980.

11

0

IIf Ullf-tcrJ.
Ju.1u tr_M.wtlli

~ ,..uA.r,-'._,.

f<'~~

I \

213

AERONAUTIOS,

. . .. "ou.

I . WIUTlfao, .

...."""" •.'"

•

C~.fI'Q.

~"'I.. 'It"rnUU"

~.""rll.Ul"'

"'I""

. 1.088.699.

,/-b.,OIZ: ·
. ~:Y~
1. , . CD" L&'

.l. P. CSOTTLt.

I'lnUILCIOIIU"'I3M tUlrt.

b'1D.II LOO .""TIO' ,Utn.

.. n'.. " .. ul ........ ,.,.

un t.. " .. "" .... , ... \. , •.

1,li7.641.

hwated"",.J',UJ '
III.""~""'"

U;.

1.

1.117.641 .

214

AERONAUTICS.

1I. IU.OSTaI.
cUlO t nlL
o.HLMU I U

1,130.981.

1.117.641.

n .
1.. - - '
Q,d;/..,u U!~
", ~~4

--..;

0. 11110HO".
~ ~UIIU'ftL

_,n.IUn" ' IL," ,", " . U,.

hl.eoled lW.' , ltl '

1.130.981.

tll .ll'_ un ~

'"~
'-"'~. ~,,~l!tI>"-

..

~

1.190.714.

r ....

K ~ . .... ,,.

hunted -.u.a, It 1l.
I lIu ' ..... u r .

215

AERONAUTICS.

-,

' :' . 141£&
.

hlillu.Ort.2S, I'OD.
r Ii. tArts. .

. . .-.....

.01."" ll'~OII\'l'\.II.L
.... _ _ ....... r-a

.d'Ut'I'U'lOll1ltISIU .
~

.... 610 ,4&2.

•

_,

~. UTU .

. . . ... ,-.

• .... 0.482

....

"'ktl4 OllU, tiOo.

r, I . IATn.

• GUoIYUHOIln"" .. t

100"" ·IIrUI,WIIUI.t
~""""",- ,

!!?z!:.

..

.
~
,

,.

..

.:..

I,

~

~-.

~.

~-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

216

... ''',n"

. - --

----

AERONAUTICS •

t . C. arCIAlD.

0. r. ruuol.
YU'Olmt r'Ol u hOIl Yl: l!IGJlU1
... , \.tu ",.' ,au. u ) " , , .....

i. 0.

l[at,,~

1'1TtJTIl)

•• , Olo EULOIIO. nOll'
• rn.l t.'f1tJ nUl ....

'.I_

041 O. CIrLOIiO If EIlO III&.
UrI..Ifu

1nJ" l ta\.

. .. UU OI

.ft ,un ,,, , " ...

,

U tUttD IOJt. 6.\t<\&,

t. C. IICUID.
01 tl PLOaIO. CIIOUt£.
u . u t u ,u rt u. It". ~ . IOU •

au

217

AERONAUTICS•

.... n1.Nl .

o. •tort.
,c. . u o.etta.

C. t: ""1&.
CUJOlttCL
6J't' '''U I '' II~ . .

.

n 10. 1_

U Ulh \l " rn n . l l , .., I'"

""""""

~U'lu st'\lt~"

1213 1/

~t'.q-~
J'lTt)It'tll !f1.U, U OI

(I. lTon.
cUlll i ern.
".~"I."

I I..I . ItU.. H, _

~

.. 'J'."l

, P.trtKttD . tl. 17. Uf14
C. SrtITC.
CAU OItTtI.
.tI '~ " ''' IIU' .'' II.I _

0Mlii0l~

ClJarlu srvt.,

~<t~~

218

No. 862,083.

AERONAUTICS.

PATENTED JULY 30, 1907.
C. 1. LONGENECKER.
VAPORIZER FOR EXPLOSIVE.ENGINES.
J.PPLIQJ.TION FILED JAIl. U. 1907.

..In{feJTCiJj.'
CIzar!.esILoTl.9fl.neclteF

' J!y~
.

'!!Y'

219

AERONAUTICS.

i.,'N~'~

rATt!TtD UL U, 1toa.

B ALDelf.
."'.

W t.. ·.h.TlTptl.
',
C,UOktTt • •

.,.u'..lI U rlU.U U , ,,,",-

P&1(DLod. SepL 2,)913.

.1.072,376 .

.~
Ir\lr:
fIg 3

1

W,ltl7~sse ...

~]~

' II. MltOINACIt.
.ut\.lhll..

'''u .11, 11, " ' ' .

II. "cCO.HACK•

PatelltedJU61, 19151 .. 1I1.... ·"' 1~

1-

m'

'Ylflf.-r ""u.s

''''-(Q_d

Fj.~

PateokdJlWl. 1915.
.... In .... ''I1).

220

AERON AUTICS.

A"lIC4l"I"lI.o Io UG. I,,-,., ..

1,141,570.

p.t.nIedJ ..6 1, 191"
J UUTI-Ul Ii TJ .

Flj/"

I

e)

~flU.ss{~

.t.

03

e If.t1Jumd. ('
f/~

"@,,;::;;:~

r---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ---- -------

221

AERONAUTICS.

'. uten..:

&.111. '-'11'1011,

uuh un.

CU JIIlnu.

U I'IIU " "

dfUI U I U'JU, UT Il. IIU.

..

--

R'f. .:s,,"'6.1'(N.
-~~

~.~"

0'"

N f.If, IIIf.;

=~o;---,-::"'~"'''' 4":.i.lil&l

222

AERONAUTICS.

page 217 (817,641, Apr. 10,1906, Harris ), because the hangin~ wall
will prevent any increased velocity head action at the final inlet, so
fuel flow will increase with air only as a result of air entrance resistance without air velocity head assistance. Quite the contrary is
the object on page 217 (817,9-H, Apr. 17, 1906, Stute), where the air
is guided directly over the fuel inlet, contributing the maximum air
velocity head effect on fuel flow added to the entrance r esistance.
A circular-slot form of fuel inlet is shown on page 218 (862,083,
J uly 30, 1907, Longenecker), so arranged behind an annular air baflle
as to receive a similar additi,e effect of air entrance resistance and
velocity head. Combination of a spraying arrangement of baffle
with the accelerating-cup idea is illustrated on page 219. (886,2 3,
Apr. 28, 1908, Wayrynen.) At low-flow rates the cup remains nearly
full with the air sweeping off a surface film, but a sudden increase of
air flow will sweep it clear of contents, adding this volume momentarily to the fuel that flows steadily at the new higher rates due to
the grea ter vacmUll. A complete shrouding of the fuel inlet with
opposed axial flow to reduce to a minimtun the velocity head effect,
though not eliminating it, because there is some such action at the
base of the shroud, is shown on page 219. (1.072,376, Sept. 2, 1913,
Alden.) Location of the fuel inlet in the center of an air vortex
produced by inward flow of air between radially cun-ed ,anes in the
air passage is shown on pages 219 and 220. (1,141,570, June 1, 1!H5,
McCormack. )
Subclass 8.8-Rotating fuel sp1'eader, air driven.-While n01'mally
such attachments are arranged solely as mixers, they may in some
cases exert a fuel-flow influence, producing to a partial degree the
action of class 2. Such is the case, for example, with the form , page
221 (1,092,953, Apr. 14,1914, Sanborn), but not so with the form on
page 221 (1,178,127, Apr. 4, 1916, Bricken). In the fonner the fuel
IS subjected to a lifting action beyond its submerged measurincr restriction, which reduces the degree of submergence and. increases the
flow, but in the latter form no fuel is subjected t o the rotating' influen,ce until it has dropped free of the passages where its flow mIght be
affected.
ubclass 3.4, variable jet and throat 1
'elation.-This is one of the
mo t promising means of correcting for the tendency toward richness on increasmg flow rates and is illustrated in one form on page
22,) (1,086,22u, Feb. 3, 1914, Sassano), where the fuel inlet while fixed
is acted upon by the vacuum at a hole in a tube surrounding the
nozzle. This tube rises with increased flow by reason of the baffles
in the tapered passa~e, thereby raising the hole to a higher point
where the vacuum is less at a given air-flow rate than at a low point.
Therefore the flow rate for fuel will not increase as fast as if its
jnlet were acted on by the vacuum at a fixed pojnt in the venturi.
The action is corrective as to proportionality in a qualitati,e sense
and can be made so to a proper degree by suitably curving the t apering walls. The effect is the same as if the fuel inlet were moved to
that portion of the venturi, as would by the ,aCUUm in it, produce the
correct constant proportioning flow. In a different way the same
effect is secured by moving an approximation to a venturi past a
fixed fuel nozzle in the form, page 225 (656,197, Aug. 21, 1900,
Lumiere) , a case about 14 years older.

AERONAUTICS.

223

Subclass 3.5, variable float chamber pressure.-Moving the position
of the fuel inlet with respect to the throat of a tapered air passage
i equivalent to adjusting the fuel-flow head to that value that would
give the correct constantly proportionate flow, by operating at the
point of fuel exit from the fuel passage, but it is evident that a
similar corrective pressure control could be exerted at the entrance
end of the fuel passage, which is the float chamber, and such is the
subject matter of this subclass, the first ca e in which is that illustrated on page 226 (686,101, Nov. 5,1901, Maybach), serviceable only
for con tant speed engines. Combination of the Venturi tube air
throat, hUT"ing a right-angled fuel nozzle, with the float chamber surface pressure means of compensation, is illustrated on page 226
(741,962, Oct. 20, 1903, Grouvelle & Arquembourg). By menns of
two calibrated holes above the fuel, one to the atmosphere and the
other to the Venturi throat, the float-chamber pressure can be kept
at a regularly increasing value below atmosphere as the flow rate
increases. Another case of different form is that on page 226.
(954,488, Apr. 12, 1910, Wolf.) Here the float chamber is brought
into communication with the mixing chamber by a '\"alve, and .air
entrance to the float chamber by another valve. Adjustment of these
two yal",es will permit of the establi hment of any efl'ecti,e head on
the fuel from zero when the btter vahoe is shut off and the former
open up to the maximum when the former is shut off and the latter
open. Opening both giyes an intermediate effect. Such a!l adjustment, how eyer, is similar to an adjustment of an air or a fuel vaha
by hand, and there is no assnrance that the variations in float chamber
pressure with a fixed valve setting will be just what is needed to compensate for fuel flow excesses. One attempt in this direction is that
on pages 226 and 227 (1,002,6±6, Sept. 5, 1011, Conrad), where holes
at the entrance and exit of the air venturi communicate with the
float cnamber with a view to making its pres ure automatically, the
mean between them, or the vacuum half that in the mixing chamber.
In this way the fuel flow is definitely corrected to a fixed degree,
but there is no assurance that this is the right de~ree nor that the
correction should be alwavs the same fraction. Another efl'ort to
secure a definite degree of float chamber pressure change from atmosphere but in the excess direction is that on page 227 (1,064,627, June
10, 1013, Ensign), where the pressure in the float chamber is the
velocity head of the air in an entrance passage, brought to bear by
pitot tube and pipe connection. In addition, the air enters in a
vortex, at the center of which is the :£° inlet, so pla'ced with refuel
erence to a dome baffle as to be in a region of low vacuum, the dome
. also acting as throttle. Neglecting the yacuum at the fuel nozzle the
effect should be the same on the fuel flow as if a fuel nozzle of the
same shape were located in the same place as the Pitot tube, but
pointing in the opposite direction and fed from a constant level
chamber open to the atmosphere.
Adjustment of float chamber pressure to a definite degree is accomplished, pages 227 and 228 (1,074,625, Oct. 7, 1913, Johnson, Glaser
& Lloyd) , by connecting it with one point of a Venturi tube while
the fuel inlet is located at another point. This case is of interest
also because it illustrates a diaphragm-controlled fuel-level valve.

224

AERONAUTICS.

Class 4, carburetors, p1'oportioning flow, aspirating single fuel,
multiple air inlets, both fixed.-Most of the carburetors of thi class
have only two air inlets, and these arranged as primary and secondary, but the effectiveness of this arrangement over a single air
lnlet depends entirely on the details. VVhen the two air streams enter
through fixed inlets that are similar and similarly placed, the second
is of no more value than a change in adjustment of either a single
air or a single fuel inlet. In such a case there can be no fuel flow
compensa.tion or correction of proportions to re tore a changing proportion to constancy, because the ratio of primary to secondary air
will be constant and the total no different with respect to fuel than
if it all entered at one point, however much the mixing may be
improved. To accomplish compensation the secondary air should
increase faster than the primary in ordinary arrangements to compensate for the fuel that naturally tends to increase too fast, and this
requires that the resistance to entrance of the secondary be increasingly smaller than that of the primary a the total flow increases.
Both kinds of arrangements are illustrated, page 229 (772,979, Oct.
25, 1904, Vam's), being of the fixed ratio sort, primary to secondary
air, page 229 (84 ,170, Mar. 26, 1907, Hedstrom) tending toward
correction by inserting a helical resistance bame in the primary air.
Application of a Venturi air tube type carburetor with primary
and secondary air, mutually adjustable by hand to the carbureting
of air u.nder pressures greater than atmosphere, is illustrated on
pages 229, 230, and 231 (991,029, May 2, 1911, Scott), without in any
way interfering with the aspirating character of the fuel, because the
£loat chamber surface pressure is equalized with that of the source of
air supply. Incidentally this is an interesting form of two-cycle
engine in which the crank end of the cylinder acts as air pump, permitting the open type of frame to be u.bstituted for the then more
common form of closed crank case. TIns form, shown on page 231
(1,159,167, Nov. 2, 1915, Breeze), goes further in seeking compensation by the use of a Venturi for both air passages, that for primary
air being very small and discharging into the throat of the large
secondary. A short free passage for the secondary, and a longer
more resistant passage for the primary, so related that the primary
helps to induce the secondary, is shown on page 231. (1,134,365,
Apr. 6, 1915, Barnes.) This same case al 0 illustrates an interesting
form of low velocity or idling lifting tube, brought into action by
closing the throttle, which act diverts the mixture from the low
velocity main air passage to a small high velocity by-pass, hell?ing to
lift unvaporized fuel. EYen though tl1e whole arrangement IS such
as to conform to the principle of increasing ratio of secondary over
primary air, it does not follow that the amount of change will be just
what is required for compensation; it may be qualitatively proper,
but quantitatively improper or inadequate.
Subclass 4.1, mixed flow.-Admission of air to the fuel passage is a
direct means of compensation qualitatively correct and questionable
only as to degree, because any such air reduces at once the vacuum
that is inducing flow, and, therefore,· reduces the flow so that if admitted to the ri~ht place and in the right degree it would constitute
a satisfactory tuel-fiow corrector and result in constancy of proportions when otherwise the fuel ratio would be increasing. The

225

URONAU'IICS.

t . J. U!UKO.
U'nI IUlllrl~UU • • tI. UII

1,086,226.

'''uurr.

.

lat.ented.Ftll~I'l4.

72805° -So Doc. 559, 64-2-15

1"'---"'-

. t.t.nwufl' , .. PlnOlIn •• nUl Uti ....

226

AERONAUTICS.

'I. tn,'n.

runiil) OCT. to. Ut"

_.
. . . . .JOt

J. oaO'lJ't'&LLt " • • UQtftIIUOtl'IO.

Ito.l71.JTOI

ro"~~~'~~I~~~~ j~~! ~~!~I't tnll p.

..... . .

• • .,. W01.r

964,90~.

'.t.MtI.llw. ••

• . •. • .nut".
,un",," " .'C [

fO~

..a

n'LOI10t I nUL

r. COIll.l.D.
(lU '!OUTD.
"'''''"H,UUlU,U,,,,,..

"""." .. ,uu ""o, ,_
1.00II.646.

,.tcate4kpt.. •• llll
"nn~

......

FI.g.<l.

r7.

.-rule.

f-.J.. C-.-..<.

.

. <nJ: oS•.-..L-.

"""'"

227

AERONAUTICS.

' r.coun .

0. 11. UUQI.

F.Lg:l.

~~

<!!:4v~1
' HOb,.,

t : f., 108"50]1. ft . S. GLutll .. 8. 11'. LLOYD.
On l Glnu.

1,074.626.

•"\""1"'11"'" ...'.n hl.eDt.ed Oct 7. 11I1~

t . T JOBIISOl'.

ft . R. OLUU4

i . LLLO'{D.
Pateoted 00l7,llHl.

1.074.625.
)(

I

A ·

'Y

P. .

.,

1/

V
I

/

I

1
."

')( '-'.o.-.J;.-fi

228

AERONAUTICS.

1:. T. I0HN80N, W. -II. (}LASER & II. 11. LLOYD.
C&UOIETEI.

1.074,625.

unlcufor rl~n .".1. ,0.

tltt

PatAl.1ed Oct. 7. 1;13-

~~------------~~,

... u' ..... nt.

r -- - - - --

- -- -- - - - -- - - - - - -- -- -- - -

AERONAUTICS.

y .. m .1Tt:

-,..TENTtD '001.

25, lIot:

I . 'hUla.
( a Ulolnu TO. BrDIOC.uIOlf tltOl li U.

•• n,,, ,

......

P4 TExnD Y.lL U. no"". . .

J •. l4I.1 'O.
O. O. '&tDITlOW.

".ft,

• rHIO " .U flU. rn

229

OA18UltTtI•
.rUlo.,IU I IU, n~'I" u ...

JltlTfIl,,.

JY"'~~u"

.l1:J~

£~.z.-_

JiJr..r.u...

..' ... s:Ff'"""
~

scott.

J A.
InUJln COIlIUltOllpior,t.
"HIOUIOl IHn tC1 I I'H

991,029.

1. 1 .ICOTT.
IITtlUL OCIlflcrno.aOIII.

UrI _ U n it .. , ...

h teDt.ed ••,2, 1111)"

~M.~~

"·L a"-J-,,~
I..:.

U(~IUll" lI~n H '

991.029.

'0
11ft.

IUU'U IUf·... .." .

......."" "'" ~ \OI~

-

-

-

---------,

-

-

230

-

-

----------------~~~~

AER.ONAUTICS.

r.

I. . , IOOTT.
'lITtU.t. OODllItnGI' Dttn.
&I, ...." ... fI~U""" &.l1li'' ' '
-

i . ICOTT.

tn'D.J.u. oonnnct "trn.

If"", _

UHI• . " . , rll..... .., . , ....

.

. .. , . ... I"fU ... ....

991.os9.

I ,
," ~I"""

991,029.

Ik:OTT

J

,IU,"" ,_ U'UlI .. 1f h ....
hlMIloeOIll, t.1811

. "LI'".II

991.029.

A lCon
.

"UI . ., •

1_ .,:11'1' IIH ......

h\eGted . .,2.llIll

231

AERONAUTICS.

J. '"

;: ' ,lC(In .

SCOtT

,nw.u.OMJllmu Ubtn.
lInlut lf1 r H... ..., .. 10" auu u .. u

991.0';19.

991.029.

PateutedKt.7t.lIll

a.... ...... ".'

M.L •.- ....,1-., ~

"A. UUIt

lor. tAU($.
WlniIU.

[.109.167

r. ttoftdHor, 2, 1916.

6. d~.

oH\ '(.OI' .... I lI.l t tlc,., U . ..

1,184.36G.

aoI._

232

AERON AUTICS.

problem is, therefore, one of how, where, and to what degree the
mixed-flow air should be admitted so that as the main flow increases
the mixed-flow air increases regularly to just the amount needed to
keep the fuel flow from increasing too fast. While the mixed-flow
idea as a compensating means is one of the latest to be recognized, it
has been disclosed for quite some time in connection with a single
fixed fuel inlet and one other fixed air. One early case, that on
page 233 (681,382, Aug. 27, 1901, Westman) shows it applied to the
old o,erflow type of stationary engine le,el cup, extending its value
for throttle-governed engines, where without it trouble would result, however satisfactory the operation might be for hit-and-miss
governed engines. Another case of stationary engine use is that on
page 233 (6 4:,662, Oct. 15, 1901, Ahara), "here it is combined with
an accelerating cup brought into play and emptied after a miss to
supply fuel to the extra air in the engine clearance over what is
there after an explosion. A very simple form of mixed-flow type of
compensator applied to a carburetor having the oyerflow sort of
constant leyel chamber is hown on page 224. (686,092, Nov. 5,
1901, Lear.) Another and also simple form used in connection with
a float chamber and curved venturi main air passage is that on page
233 ( 98,920, Sept. 15, 190 , Pierson), where, as in the case on page
233 (Westman), the fuel Yalye is drilled.
A more definite means of regulatinO" the mixed-flow air is that on
page 235 (1,121,630, Dec. 22, 1914, Ilolley) , where the lowering of
the level in the float chamber that results from high-flow rates is
relied upon to admit air to the fuel passage, and the construction
is used in conjunction with an accelerating cup beyond the fuel inlet.
The presence of the drain hole at the low point of the mixing chamber is an indication of the difficulty in vaporizing modern gasolines,
which at low-flow rates tend to accumulate and when enough has
collected to suddenly overflow. In place of such drain holes it has
become the practice to provide a lifting tube, extending abo,e the
throttle. A most interesting mixed-flow fuel nozzle is that on page
235 (1,130,490, Mar. 2, 1915, Delaunay & Belleyille), where the
amount of such air is controlled by the velocity in the throat. Another
case controlled by the level in an auxiliary well, which al 0 acts as
accelerating cup, is shown on page 235. (1,149,035, Aug. 3, 1915,
Doue.) Here the fuel passage is supplied from two orifices to the
float chamber with a siphoning well between them, which well fills
at low-flow rates only one fuel orifice supplying the nozzle. A sudden increase in demand empties the well and exposes a series of air
holes through which air enters to retard the fuel flow, the number
depending on the vacuum, as the second fuel orifice acts to close
them against the vacuum tending to expose them.
This principle of fuel-flow compensation directly acting on the net
fuel head by admission of air to the fuel pa sage, termed mixed
flow, illustrated here in connection with a single fuel-fixed inlet and
one other fixed-air inlet, will be found in use with other fuel and
air inlet combinations, as is also the case with its counterpart compensating scheme, the control of float chamber pressure.

233

AERONAUTICS •

.... Ut.lIt.

x.. I",na

,

.r~nA~r.
Ay

...zpN;'''''''''',."
J. .. A"7I'..,....""...

t-(/~~

~;;S~

;"

~hr.
$/77,'/ .t6J&....".
.-t61""'~~,

...

Jt;~~

G,I.PIWOIf.
G. V.

AIIA~A .

"oItnt •• Oct t5,IIIOL

898,920.

j ,
~I

a

.~ t•

.t -U- r1 rIM ","=-_

234

ABRON AUTICS.

IlL 688,012.

K. M. LEAR.

Patented H'ov. 5, 1
90t.

VAPOR IZER FOR GASOlENE [HGIMES

"""~&10<1".",~,,OI..l

•

235

AERONAUTICS.

I."

,. outt.

O. K. !OLm

·e W OU1E L
.fH IHU" 'IU' IIU II H I\.

t,lIll,S80.

l,lSl,S30.

,..

~l..

( , t . ( . DOU(.

1. "OtL1UIf.t.l·ltLLtVII.Lt.

UUUl tUL

.",'Hlit. mu,.o.',lfl ..

',130,490.

1,149,030.

INVfIlTt"

c. e:.

f: Ooue

"'.,..~..(

ATTO""U

236

AERONAUTICS.

Class 5-Carburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, multiple fuel
single air inlets, both {ixed.- Just as two or more fixed air inlets,
differently situated or having different flow characteristics associated
with a single fixed fuel inlet may be made to act in a compensating
manner, so also is it possible to fix more than one fuel inlet in a single
fixed air passage, the problem being to discover such an arrangement
as "ill result in a combined fuel flow from all of the several differently situated fuel inlets, that will increase with the air in a constant
ratio instead of an increasinO' ratio, as would be the case if all
were similarly situated, and therefore equivalent to one. In some
cases, however, the two fuel inlets are arranged so that a correct ratio
of fuel to air can be obtained at low speed 01' low flow rates by
manual adjustment, and al 0 again at high speed, the intermediate
ranges being more or less uncertain. The three typical groups of
this class are each designated by a subclass number and the several
cases collected under the subclasses.
Subclass 5.1-Main fuel inlet with supplementary high-speed jet.Two fuel inlets located at different points in an air Yenturl, one supplying all or practically all the fuel for low speed and the other
coming into action as the flow rate increases, is the combination illuE '
trated on page 237 (1,0'79,63-!:, Nov. 25, 1913, Burchartz), in which
olso the accelerating cup is incorporated.
Subclass 5.~-ilf ain fuel inlets with supplementary idling jet.Addition to a single plain fixed fuel and air inlet, of a second fuel
inlet above the throttle, arranged to act on closed throttle when the
main jet is supplying inadequate fuel or none at all, is illustrated on
paa-e 238 (995,0'74, June 13, 1911, McCarthy) .
~ubclass 5.3-Fuel standpipe.-Instead of fixing the proportions
by manual adjustment or location of two fuel inlets for two limiting
flow rates, as in the previous cases, without any definite effort to
secure graduation between them, the regular graduation may be the
main object.
sually the method employed here is that designated
as the standpipe, illustrated in its multitubular form on page 239
(1,093,343, Apr. H, 1914, McAndrews), which is only a step ill this
direction, as it has but h1'ee fuel tubes with outlets at different levels
in the air pas age, therefore constituting what might be called a
three-point adjustment. It is evident that with this arrangement the
correct proportions could be secured for steady flow at least for three
separate flow rates. Still more tubes, or passages formed in the walls
of a tube with outlets at different heights, the highest one being above
the throttle, are found on page 239 (1,148.378 July 27 1915, Grapin
& Grapin) . Evidently any number could be so fixed; the more there
are, however, the smaller each becomes, the less easy it is to secure the
several separate manual adjustments, and the more the tendency for
the fuel in the standpipes to surge and oscillate on pulsating flow,
which, of course, defeats the purpose. The fact that this sort of disposition of multiple fuel inlets, dissimilarly placed, is usually associated with variable air inlets is an indication of difficulty with or
objections to a single air inlet.

r----~----- ---------

--

237

AERONAUTICS.

J. O. BURCBARTZ.
C1JlDiETIJ..

1.079.634.

--

Peteato<! No.. ~,

191~

238

ABRON AU TICS.

T. J. MoCARTHY
FlIlUNQ ' TTJCHKEST fOR C
AUtJlt1'tV
. rrtICl .l.Tlurn.tD If,U JI UIO

996,074.

PaUlnted Jun. 13. 191 1.
17-

239

AERONAUTICS.

W t . tldUIt ...
.

W' TN~~~E" .

~,.
.----

ar;/{iJ~

1.148.378.

/&'-

~
.f'<gS.

" 1 , lbU OIC " "

NeaW 'pr. le. Itlf

1.093.343.

"y

un''''I .. ,IU'.'II II.''''

1.093.343.

., ...',.......,'"

i'l'«Itt'ldJ.vr· 1f..lfI ..

240

AERONAUTICS.

mass 6, carOu1'etoTs, proportioning flow, aspirating, multiple fueZ
and multiple aiT inlets, both fixed.-That suitable dispositions of differently situated multiple fuel and air inlets offers possibilities of
compensated proportioning flow is clear from the preceding examination of several air inlets for a single fuel and of several fuel inlets
for a single air and along similar lines. However, still other and
new possibilities are opened up in the double and multiple carburetor
in which two or more complete carburetors may be brought into action
successively as the flow rates increase, anyone being limited to flowrate variations not great enough to seriously affect the proportionality.
In the case on page 244 (1,097,165, May 19, 1914, Bucherer), two
fuel inlets are provided-one supplied from a constant leyel cup
open to the atmosphere, the other forms another such cup, fed from
the first, in which the surface pressure is less, being open to the air
and to the venturi air throat, so that the surface pressure decreases
with increasing air-flow rates, and the level becomes higher than in
the float cup. The sum of the fuel flow from these two will clearly
not increase with air flow as fast as that from an ordinary jet, but
it is a question whether or not the compensation is correct in amount.
Aspiration from the fuel inlet with equalized float-chamber pressure
is promoted by a second small air inlet directly crossing it. This
is a case of compensation by positioning of inlets.
Subclas8 6.1, doubZe carbu1'etor, prog1'essive, by throttle.- J aturally two fuel inlets, each in its own air inlet, can be proportioned
or adjusted to give correct proportions for at least two different flow
rates, and this is the idea of the double carburetor, which may have
different flow characteristics and proportions at other rates, depending on the form of each of the two elementary carburetors. If the
engine speed be constant, as with governor-controlled stationary engines, then there is a more or less definite relation between the flow
rate and the throttle position; but this is not the case with variable
speed engines, such as the automobile class, where f or any given
throttle position the speed and flow rate may vary most widely.
The propeller loaded engine, marine or aero, falls between. These
facts are important, because in the fir t group there would be some
reason for associating the successive action of the separate parts of
multiple carburetors with the throttle because of the flow-rate
relation; but in the second class there is no rational basis for such a
control, the vacuum as a direct result of flow rate replacing the
throttle in validity. In fact, no matter what the type of engine
as to speed and load variations vacuum change is a direct function
of flow-rate change, and is a more rational and fundamental actuating means than the throttle.
The cases of this subclass of two carburetors brought into action
successively by the throttle must b~ regarded as excluded from application to variable speed engines where speed is as much a matter of
resisting torque as of throttle position. A small complete carburetor,
suitable in size for idling with the throttle closed, associated with
a larger single fixed inlet carburetor for normal working, the idler
remaining in action, constitutes one special form of this double carburetor throttle, and is controlled is illustrated on page 245. (1,00-2,699,

~----------------------------------------------------------------------------------~

AERONAUTICS.

241

Sept. 5, 1911, Jouffret & Renee.) This can be regarded as somewhat more legitimate than the double form with throttle connected
so the smaller one is advanced, shown on page 246. (1,011,694, Dec.
12, 1911, Winton.) Two independent carburetors, a smaller one acting as idler for low speed, are combined in such a way that the outlet
of the idler is led to a separate branched header within the main
header of a vertical multi cylinder engine, the idler branches ending
directly at the inlet valves on page 245. (1,069,502, Aug. 5, 1913,
Wadsworth.) The object of this is to prevent the dilutIOn of the
small idling charges by the large volume of whatever may be in the
main header, and yet not interfere with combined action of both when
conditions are favorable. Closed throttle leaves only the idler in
action; wide-open throttle permits both to act.
Subclass 6.~, multiple carbure t01' , progressive by throttle.-Such
cases as fall under this class are the same as the last except as to
number of elements, page 247 (759,624, JVhy 10, 1904, MacMullrin),
showing five, brought into action successively by the rotation of a
barrel throttle having five slots of different length. A peculiar form
of fuel inlet passage is here shown, consisting of small slots cut in a
tapered plug screwed down tight on a tapered seat. Six elements,
each with one fixed fuel, having fixed primary and secondary air,
with a rotating plate throttle, are shown on page 247. (948,612,
Feb. 8, 1910, Krause.) In multiple carburetors, the succession of
which is throttle controlled, speed changes may build up flow rates
that are excessively high for a given throttle opening, and thereby
b!'ing about just the sort of undesirable enrichment that the multiplicity is supposed to avoid. To avoid this a vacuum-controlled
choke or automatic secondaxy speed-governing throttle may be introduced, as on pag~ 248. (1,018,262, Feb. 20, 1912, Neal.) Should
the engine speed become excessive for ~ given exposure of jets, the
spring-resisted piston valve moves across the mixture outlet and
closes it enough to induce the vacuum on, and hence the flow through
the passages. The effect is similar to a vacuum control of succession.
Three, one leading above the throttle and the second with an acceleuting cup, are provided on pages 248 and 249 (1,158,589, Nov. 2,
1915, Thurot), but involving throttle-controlled succession.
Subclass 6.3, double carbu1'etor, progressive by vacuum.-Vacuum
being a more rational basis than throttle movement for controlling
succession, this class is more interesting, and the form page 250
(1,176,627, Mar. 21, 1916, Ve.r Phwck) being so recent, is doubly interesting as an illustration. Here two fixed fuel inlets are each
located in separate venturi throats of different size and fed from
overflow types of level cups, the overflow from one feeding the
other. The smaller .acts for low-flow rates, and can evidently be
made to give correct proportions for a.t least one rate. When the
vacuum exceeds a predetermined value a check valve controlling the
outlet of the second opens and establishes flow through the larger
passage, which has a second venturi throat, the vacuum at which is
immediately brought into action and used to hold the check valve
from chattering by a pipe connection to a piston attached to the
check valve. Provision for hot and cold air and a multitubular form
of mixer are alsQ provided. At some higher speed or flow rate the
72805°-S. Doc. 559,64-2--16

242

AERONAUTICS.

proportions can evidently be made correct again, but the 'proportionality in the intermediate ranges depends on the charactenstics of the
form of each single carburetor independently, which must be the
same as for those of class 3.
Subclass 6.;", multiple carburetor, pr(Jgressive by vacuwm.-As the
number of separate complete carburetors is increased, the proportionality can be made quite correct at a larger number of points in the
flow range, and this is the object of the cases of this subclass, with, of
course, an increase in complication and number of parts as an ofIset.
Five separate venturis, with single fixed air and fuel passages are
provided on page 251 (871,320, Nov. 19, 1907, BoIlee), brought into
action by one pIston valve vacuum actuated against its spring. Six
fixed fuel inlets, each in a fixed cylindrical air passage, are brought in
successively by the vacuum lift of a series of difIerently wei 9hted outlet check valves, gravity loaded, as shown on page 252. ~1,072,733,
Sept. 9, 1913, Kaltenbach.)
To cause as hiO'h a flow rate to take place through a single fixed
passage as through a series of separate passages with vacuum-controlled outlets will involve a very much greater vacuum at the outlet,
and therefore reduce the absolute pressure at which the engine receives its charge, with corresponding reduction of volumetric efficiency and power. This valuable feature of such a series of passages,
vacuum controlled at their outlets, is also characteri tic of all that
class of carburetors that have automatic air-inlet \alve for any number of passages, including a single one, so these have something in
common with the class here under discussion.
Bubclass 6.5-lIfixed flow.-As pointed out in dealing with mixed
flow in carburetors with a single fuel inlet, this valuable direct compensation is apElicable to arrangements of more than one fuel inlet.
The first case ot this class, that on page 253 (907,953, Dec. 29, 1908,
Bavery), provides two main fuel inlets, both at the same point in the
throat of an air. venturi, and a third above the throttle. One of the
main fuel inlets is of the plain type that in a fixed air passage tends to
flow excessively fast with reference to the air at increasinO' flow rates.
The other compensates by its mixed-flow action at high rates and
plain flow at lower rates, being fed from a chamber ha,ing an
atmospherio lent to which fuel from the float chamber is supplied
thrO'ugh a calibrated opening. This auxiliary fuel chamber also
has a tube leading to the third' inlet above the throttle and acts in
addition as' an accelerating cup. On closed throttle there is no flow
through either of the mam inlets because of inadequate air-throat
vacuum, the accelerating cup is full t and the idling jet in adion.
Opening of the throttle throws this ] et out and brings in both the
main jets, that supplied from the accelerating cup gradually decreasing in flow as the fuel head supplied to it falls in the accelerating cup
and faster later on as air enters as well. A somewhat imilar action
results with the slightly difIerent stnlcture on pages 253 and 254
(993.123, July 1 , 1911, Scaife), which al 0 has three fuel inletS,
~ne above the throttle, and two main, which merge into one at their
tops. An accelerating cup feeds the idling jet and the second main
or mixed-flow jet, but instead of securing its fuel directly from the
float chamber the fuel passes through the same measuring passage

AERONAUTICS.

243

as supplies the main jet. Accordingly there is a possibility that
both main nozzles may act as mixed-flow passages at high-Bow rates.
On page 254 (1,002,700, Sept. 5, 1911, Joffret & Renee) there are
but two fuel inlets, one main and one idling above the throttle, the
main acting as a mixed-Bow passage at high rates. This is also
the case on page 254 (1,063,148, :May 27, 1913, Anderson), but in
the latter case the idling jet is fed not from the accelerating cup
but from a separate connection to the Boat chamber. The feeding
of main mixed-Bow jet and idling jet from an accelerating cup having a single Boat-chamber connection, is illustrated on page 255
(1,090,04'7, Mar. 10, 1914, GoudaI'd & Muenesson), and a case of
accelerating cup alternately feeding fuel to the ielling jet or mixedBow air to the main jet is shown on page 255 (1,109,974, Sept. 8,
1914, Fagard). In-corporation of the alternate-Bow passa&es directly
in the fuel nozzle is shown on page 255 (1,170,348, Feb. 1, 1916,
Schuttler), where the idling jet gets fuel from the same calibrated
float-chamber orifice as feeds the main jet and some air from the main
jet hole on closed throttle. On open throttle the flow reverses; at
the idling end of the nozzle fuel enters the main air at the Venturi
throat, being modified by air received from the idling end of the
nozzle, escaping with the fuel. A similar case of incorporation of all
passages in a sort of multiple-walled and orificed-fuel nozzle is that
on pages 255 and 256 (1,170,416, Feb. 1, 1916, Claudel), where aYertical nozzle is set for parallel flow in a bend of a fixed air passage, so
that at various heights the vacuum is different and by reason of holes
and multiple walls a compensating mixed flow is accomplished.
One main and one idling fuel mlet fed from a single connection
to the float chamber, to which the accelerating cup is also attached,
is shown on page 256 (1,175,536, Mar. 14, 1916, Longuemare), the
fuel-measuring orifice being located before the whole. Here the
accelerating cup alternately acts as auxiliary fuel feed, on opening
the throttle, and a mixed-flow air passage, to correct the excess-flow
tendencies of the main jet at high rates. A case of incorporation of
the two fuel passages and a mixed flow in the fuel valve stem is
&hown on page 256 (1,183,019, May 16, 1916, McGuire), where the
lower and manually adjustable fuel inlet serves for low flow rates
and the higher one is brought into action at higher rates, ,yith mixedflow compensation from the hole through the stem fitted with an
adjusting valve.
Subclass 6.6, fuel standpipe.-The bringing into action of successively higher fixed fuel inlets as the vacuum increases, associated with
more than one fixed air inlet, without mixed flow, is another means
of compensation already examined for single . air inlets. On pages
257 and 258 (927,211, July 6, 1909, B ennett), a single fuel standplpe
has a vertical row of perforations and is open at the top to the atmosphere. At low Bow rates only the lower fuel holes act, all the rest
feeding air into the main stream, but at high rates the fuel issues
from more and higher holes and from lower holes at higher rates,
because of the head increase. The free top air acts as a compensator
to some degree, because without it the fuel would certainly rise
higher and flow faster.

244

AERONAUTICS.

X. .DeBtAt ..

... . lIcIUtL

UU ' _ClIltllnn.

I U U CUllI l tTU .

.,rL /U" . . 1I1. . . . ll •• IIU

HHltH'HUU'''I I I, U1I

1.097.16~.

h~lIledJ(.,"'I.J."

l.o9T,l_6_~_._ _ _~_ _

1 1 1 . . -." , 1 "

11

1II. 80CBtltR..

X.8":10RCIU.

UUf Cl.Iou.nu.

.,1& f

"rUUlI. ' IIU. , ,,, .. UII

l,09U6~.

PaUlDtedJb·l 10,Ulli
1';UIl·....U~ ..

~IUClnu.

UHlhllU

1.097,160.

,un lit,.

Ult

Pa~

Nat 10, lOll.

IIIUn....h l .

245

AERONAUTICS.

.. ' . 1 JOO "ltT .
.

I.

l . M. lUn.

t."

IOD[ratT. J , tI. ltlra.
c'uJOUttL

."~1 "\" " 1I1"" " ".1_

1,002,699.

8 . V l . JDO rnn

\1,002,699.

~

J . ., IUtt.

0 1 'U.DS"OIT!.

rWIIW&ept.~.IIII"
I

u" ..... iu. ,

246

AERONAUTICS•

..........

... "'1ft•.

' ,"Jm..
dtuU"N.,II. nU ... f..YfIII.
,

1.011.694.

247

AERONAUTICS.

' .. 1U,tU

hn;JI'rtP VAT 10, no(.
. I . I . IiI A,KUIIK,
V"",OUZEl rOI BtD1OC,UIOK non'&&.
u,~u tl' J II U .Il" I . II",

o
.)HYtIiTU,
Aoo¥~Jfl_If'..,l,O""

W1TW,UU

.f1uJd...,.i3t.
J>..u.;;,,,",,,,,-

I . t . luoar;.

R.t. lII.lO'at.

nuuml rot OC n lllTIO' U Olna.

eA'~~~~f~~,~O:;~O~~!IJU,

948,612.

•

.!'al6D.).ed r.b.I, IIIIG.

948,612.

I.I PlI . . 1 IU II ~U 1.11 r liN

h~ted!M.I. 1tl1l
• •• u .."'""' ....

248

AERONAUTICS.

J . l . lfUL

' . ". 1fhL

UUOlnn rot \.ttu.u. OOItn'nOl t;ntna.

~ rolIJtU " tOO.' tltTtHl:J'ItJII.

.UI.lU"U IlI-U ....... IOI ..

1,018,262.

1,018,262.

.. ... JI'UL.

'.lot. l IlUIOT.

tilIOmD rot IntU l t'llOIR'DInOl DOIttL

, ,,u'..

'. rr l~n .""" , ,,

rIU"~&.t. IOI"

~o

.r-ij.l.

1,018,269.

"' ~ .. rr"

....

h~ted'Feb.2O,tll1.

htmttd.~w.2,

1V1&.
"·U'_'UI L

IIUn-.UI '-

wmrcsscs.
&'9· ""9-'.
~

249

AERONAUTICS.

/. t. r.

THU~Or.

C.lIIUIUlU.

1,168,589.

Wf77(£SS£$

~' f JJ,£ '9'"

j'~~

Patented Nov. 2",'91i.
2 nUfI_IU p I.

INYENT1l11

. .r..-.- t .7rri._r ,lt

B~ -:;J~
JTTQIlNCI

250

AERONAUT ICS.

W I V PlANC I
[A
CAUultru

p. ten t«l l,,"r. 21. 1911

1,176,627.
21

F I.g1

Invent.or

~~m .«er-Plzlt1ckJ

b~

~

H i o,,:)lL"!t.t.or"~.

251

AERONAUTICS.

l.. tOLLEt.
C,IIUltTtL

t...oLt.b,
UlluatTIiI,

.... H.IU'IUrILU ..... .. u ...

....-.

. .-d·:flI
/~· _\. } "1
~/--

~

l l""'~

d~' ;::;e;-.c

cs

252

.AERONAUTICS.

IL "

1.072.733.

L W h LTtlUe&
.

tlLTtIUU'L

P&t.ellted Septt, Igi l.
• IlIn'-If.U1' 10,.

Z,

I,

1.072 .7 ~ .

Nto.toi Stpt. ' . 1111.
'Ulll _ _ """

...-----------~--- ---

-

- -

-

253

AERONAUTICS.

,. unut.
907,9~3 .

r. uttltt.

~I::-n~~!f'~

Pateal.ed Dec.2t, 1 .

c.usnn:a rot unGllOi iwft,u..
'''~lutlfJ rll,~'

907,963.

P.teutedDec.2f,IOC¥.'UI~"" ·'

i . l . Shift.

r. l4vtatT .

UU!1UTD fOI art.OI!O xmll.
'
,,"U~nl" u~u ..... II. " "

'd., 1I_1ft',

907,9~3.

998,123.

E'.-<;9.8.

254

AERONAUTICS.

k.1.ic.irFL.

... I . 1C1m.

CUIaJrTtL

~ &Fl U • ." .. ~w .1.&.11".11.'

hiootA41ol71~

998,123.

IIIL

:u'.

t l n n ......

c

} JIi!'t/tc.r.se.s

<%tf3.4Vd-.><, -

.f/~
p. 11". J . JourntT • J. III. IEltl.
•

1. 1II . 1II0USOI

C 'Q lttD.
"

enIQut"

.. . 'U.. " .. 'ILU " ' I.... . .
.

-1,002/700.

a}

Ptl.euted Sept. 5. 18U

..,HI.. U ..

1,063,148.

I
L/ruenCo,i
J£en.r&' &f~~~_r-

,=~~~

,u.u IIU N . UI~

,........

...,~.lDj.

255

ABRONA UTICS.

II. OOUDUD .. W MtlfKtUOJ
.

~UUGlntL

•

"H""It1"~"'I1 . U . 1I11

1,090,047.

Ptttated

)(u. lo.111~

C, H. ClAUO[l
( _nUI"I •
.,,,IUII.O,,U. '": .. 1111

256

AERO NAUTICS.

O M CUI/Dn.
. .

1,1 70,416.

P,&.o"".1,1818.

, ,,ul._
..

nl" . ~

UIUIIU"
'.""U U" "II' .... I.I\I~

't.}..GM ...U .
IOUt
.... " . ... . " 'I . . .. . ... , ,, ..

L'\ouI"':"'U\,"

fr

nIU'III',

1.176.636.

hljo!f<i""l.l'l ~

J,pO,41 6.

toI.GUIIL

"'telM! KAt. It 1
91&

1,183.019

Pal&lted MarIO. ID
I&.

,.ot·,. .
.;l".. "'_.

~

257

AERONAUTICS.

A. C. BERllm.
O!UVUTU.

Pa~

JuJ,y 8, 1908

.-n..g' .......IU '"

••

72805°--S.])oc.559,64-2----17

-,..----

- --.

258

AERONAUTICS.

A. C. BENNETT.

927,211.

A'nJOif!~':I~{ I, I'O~
Patented July 6, 19ot.
, ,.un-Uut ,

<fJI

''''VFJ/TOR

AERONAUTICS.

259

Ola.ss 7- 0arbu'l'etors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single fixed
fuel inlet, single air inlet with regulating valve.-T his is the first of
the classes in which compensation by changing the flow areas themselves is employed, instead of relying on variations in fuel flow head
with fixed passages, or on the number of such fixed inlets brought into
action at different flow rates by reason of their location or disposition.
In this particular subclass the fuel inlet is single and fixed and the
air inlet is v·aried in such a way as to control the air entrance resistance and its velocity at the fuel inlet, 'So that the vacuum at that point
shall be just sufficient to induce a.- fuel flow in constant proportion to
the air. This vacuum should, of course, be less, other things being
equal, than what it would be with a fixed unvarying nonregulated air
jnlet. Each of the typical groups of forms or means of actuation of
the air inlet regulating valve constitutes a subclass, but certain cases
overlapping as to subclasses or not directly falling in anyone are
grouped under the general class heading.
One example of this is the arrangement on page 264 (864,111,
Aug. 20, 1907, Sickles), where an externally driven fan draws air
through the carburetor and delivers a mixture at a pressure greater
than atmosphere, which should yield an increased power output, the
air entering through an inlet valve controlled by an outlet throttle,
not a primary control for variable speed engines. Another such
double featured case is that on page 246 (911,692, Feb. 9, 1909, Andrew), where the air is drawn through a multiported automatic piston valve, passing the fuel inlet by way of an automatically adjusting air throat, which for low rate flows sends all the air across the
fuel inlet and for high flow rates by-passes some as a compensation.
Another more pronounced automatically variable throat to nozzle relation, with high flow rate by-pass of air previously admitted through
a throttle-controlled air valve, is that on pages 264 and 265. (935,833,
Oct. 5, 1909, Bassford.) A sort of combmation of automatic ail' inlet
and one that is throttle controlled is that on page 265 (1,062,688, May
27, 1913, Bastian), where the air enters through an automatic valve
resisted by the throttle cam, and another such is that on page 265
(1,101,73G, June 30, 1914, Gillett), having an automatic swing type
of valve within the body of a plug valve that is a combined throttle
and throttle-controlled air inlet, the automatic controlling the direction of the air that has entered, and its velocity at the fuel inlet.
Subclass 7.1-Fu·el inlet between throttle-controlled air valve and
throttle.-The direct object of this plan is adjustment of air-entrance
resistance so that the vacuum at the fuel inlet shall be maintained
proper for constantly proportionate flow, a simple and practical sort
of adjustment but not appropriately connected to a throttle for
variable speed engines because of the complete lack of dependence
of flow rate on throttle position in this case, however much closer the
relation may be for engines of the constant-speed class.
On page 26G (771,492, Oct. 4, 1904, Parmenter), a fuel inlet-in
fact, a pair of them-is located between a pair of damper valves
locked together, one acting as air inlet and the other as throttle, the
linkage being adjustable to control to a limited degree their relative
rate of movement, which must be properly graduated. On page 2G7
(789,749, May 16, 1905, Maxwell), the plug valve, with one edge
acting as air valve and the other as throttle, has the inlet in the

260

•

AERONAUTICS.

middle between them, an arrangement that limits the adjustment and
graduation of relative movement. A cylindrical chamber with an
adjustable air inlet in one end and a slot in its side acts by rotation
as both air valve and throttle, the fuel inlet being between as shown
z
on page 267. (794,927, July 18, 1905, Cashman & Cushman.) A sliding air valve linked to a damper throttle, pages 267 and 268 (932,465,
Aug. 31,1909, Haas), is fitted with a hollow-stem needle-valved fuel
inlet between them, the hollow stem acting as a lifting tube for lowflow rates as its upper end communicates with a passage above the
throttle. Another such lifting tube with an accelerating cup is
shown in the combined air inlet and throttle plug type on page 268
(1,006,387, Oct. 17,1911, Kreis, jr.)
A slide valve acting as throttle and air valve, is shown on page
269 (1,062,3S3, May 20, 1913, Higgins), the relative adjustment of
the~r two areas being accomplished by varying the lateral width of
one port of the air inlet and using another port unmodified, which
closes as the adjusted one opens under the longitudinal movement of
the slide as it closes the· throttle. A great variety of such linkages
is found, showing a more Or less keen appreciation of the importance
of the proper relative adjustment with reference to the throttle, both
for slide valves, balanced piston and poppet valves, and dampers of
all sorts, some of them involving the use of cams. In the form page
269 (1,095,101, Apr. 28, 1914, Gardner) a pair of cam grooves cause
a disk air valve and a similar throttle to move axially in opposite
directions with reference to a tapered air throat, around which a
series of fuel inlets is disposed. One of the most recent of these cases
applies the pair of linked dampers of figure 140 to a triple inletone for gasoline, one for kerosene, and one for water, similarly disposed and each with its own level chamber, as shown on page 2'70.
(1,150,202, Aug. 17, 1915, Johnston & Longenecker.) The use of a
double-tapered sleeve, with two contractions moving in a cylindrical
shell past a solid plug, and a central fuel-inlet plug, as combined
air inlet and throttle, is shown on page 270 (1,151,286, Aug. 24,
1915, Rowell), the relative area changes being accomplished by the
shape angle or curvature of the tapers of the two plugs with reference to their matching annular sleeves.
Subclass 7.2-fuel inlet at or before air valve which acts as
throttle.-Placing the fuel inlet jet at or before the air inlet orifice
relieves it of practically all the vacuum due to entranoe resistance,
and makes fuel flow depend solelY or substantially so, on variations
of air velocity past it, as such ve iocity produces a pressure depression equivalent to the air velocity head. In such a case the air valve
is itself the throttle. Of course air velocity has no prime relation
to the throttle or air valve opening except for constant speed engines,
so as in other cases where the throttle is the means of actuating
whatever air or fuel regulating valves may be used, the application
is of lesser if of any value whatever, to variable-speed engines. A
balanced form of air valve, acting as throttle and so formed as to
keep the air flow concentrated past the fuel nozzle which is located
in front in a region of practically no vacuum except that due to air
velocity, is shown on page 271. (815,712, Mar. 20, 1906, Johnston.)
The valve is a piston with a tapered central hole in which the nozzle
stands, and with radial ports throughout its length. It moves in a

AERONAUTICS.

261

cylindrical par tition between the air supply and the mixing chamber.
It keeps the air flow moving acr oss the jet, at first almost entirely
radially and later part radially and part longitudinally. I n the
Iorm, page 271 (816,846, Apr. 3, 1906, Charron & Girardot), the
fuel inlet is located just below the plane of action of an iris throttle,
similar to the photographic shutter. A pair of oppositely moving
slides with the fuel valve located midway in their plane of action is
shown on page 272. (868,251, Oct. 15, 1907, Boilee.) A single
damper, arranged with a fuel inlet at one side of the passage, is
made to serve as on page 273 (1,080,118, Dec. 2, 1913, Monosmith),
and the same thing with the damper bent and used with one water
and one fuel inlet differently situated so the fuel flow has a lead on
that of the 'Tater, is shown on page 273. (1,108,181, Aug. 25, 1914,
Kane.) Use of a helical spring, the coils of which may touch or on
extension be drawn apart, is used as both air inlet and throttle valve,
as shown on page 274 (1,117,233, Nov. 1'7,1914, Parker), the fuel
inlet being inside the coil, and the lower portion serving as air inlet
and the upper part as throttle. A pair of cams geared together
with the fuel inlet midway is shown on page 274. (1,143,227, June
15, 1915, Prescott.)

Subclass 7.S-Fuel inlet between automatic air valve and throttle.-Air entering through an automatic .air valve will not produce
as great an increase in entrance resistance or in static mixing chamber ,acuum with increase of flow as if it entered through a fixed
inlet, and this not only tends to produce a higher density of charge
than is otherwise possible but it may be used as a means of compensation for correcting proportions. Of course, velocity head vacuum
at the fuel inlet is the same with automatic valved as with fixed inlets, so whateyer compensating effect is produced must be through
a modification of the entrance resistance. The way in which the
entrance resistance varies with flow depends primarily on the form
of the automatic valve and on its manner of loading.
A sprinO"-loaded piston type of automatic air inlet is shown on
page 275 (759,396, May 10, 1904, Rutenber), the air passing down
and impinging on a plate surrounding the fuel' inlet and mushrooming sideways, so whatever velocity head vacuum there is will probably
be negative, though small, and fuel flow is controlled primarily by
the vacuum produced by the valve, which will be determined by the
sprinO" and the shape of the ports. On page 275 (794,502, July 11,
1905, I-Iennebutte), air enters through an annular check-valve spring
loaded, passes downward, sweeping at the bottom a two-ported
fuel inlet on which it exerts some positi,-e velocity head effect, and
a hand-adjusted by-pass permits this to be least manually controlled.
Mixing baffles are also employed beyond the jet. A swing checkvalve spring loaded is illustrated on page 2'75 (796,723, Aug. 8,
1905, Hewitt), with the fuel inlet in the center of a straight cylindrical chamber. A similar spring-loaded swing check that does not completely close the inlet and therefore exerts no entrance resistance at
very low flow r ates is shown on pages 2'75 and 276. (806,434, Dec. 5,
1905, Schebler. ) The air flows downward to a bend into which the
fuel nozzle projects, the air velocity head acting negatively but uncertainly because of the eddy currents and initial direction given to the
air by the spring valve. Another swi ng check, itself a spring, and

- -

262

--

--

-

----

AERONAUTICS.

arranged in a straight passage to deflect the air away from the
fuel inlet at first and then as flow increases allowing the air to sweep
the fuel inlet, is shown on page 276 (831,547, Sept. 25, 1906, Dunlop & Dunlop), so that at low-flow r ates the vacuum is all due to
entrance resistance, but at high r ate, as this increases but little with
such a valve, the air velocity head vacuum is brought into action to
induce sufficient flow . Another attempt to secure velocity head control by form is shown on page 276 (947,712, Jan. 25, 1910, Henricks), which places the jet in a bend supplied with air through a
spring check with a fixed by-pass. Four fuel inlets, similarly
placed and swept by the air from a single spring air check, are
shown on page 277 (986,700, Mar. 14, 1911, Fo~cl), the four acting,
so far as proportionality is concerned, no differently than one.
While designed primarily to operate on compressed air, the form
shown on page 278 (1,039,229, Sept. 24, 1912, Walker) is e peciallY
well adapted to air at atmospheric pressure and will have the same
proportionality characteristics with reference to flow, whatever the
air pressure, except, of course, as density changes may enter as
variables. The supply air acting directly on the free fuel surface
before passing the spring-loaded air valve p.roduces a differential
pressure that will result in fuel flow even without the location of
the jet in an air throat as shown. Of course, this arrangement
naturally tends toward eIll'lchment. A graduated series of fi,e annular air checks is shown on page 276 (1,12-1,91 , Jan. 12, 1915,
Krause) to build up sufficient vacuum with flow increase to secure
correct proportioning at at least as many points as there are rino-s
for steady flow.
Subclass 7.4-fuel inlet swept by air entering through automatic
'valve.-Unless the seating resistance of automatic air inlet valves
increases with the flow rate as they open, the entrance resistance will
not produce a sufficient ,acuum at the fuel inlet to draw in a proportionate amount of fuel, and in such cases there must be a resort to
,elocity head as istance. Therefore, when the fuel inlet is beyond
the automatic air ,alve there must be a properly graduated increasing air yalve seating load or a graduated air ,elocity head action at
the jet or both. If the fuel inlet be located in the opening of the
automatic air ,' alve so as to get only velocity head vacuum and no
entrance resistance vacuum, then as a fixed opening builds up vacuum
too fast for proportionate fuel flow, a yielding automatic valve may
be a proper compensator, but it likewise must have a variable load
because otherwise the velocity would not increase at all as the opening and the flow increased. Therefore the question of location of the
fuel inlet with reference to the entering air tream is intimately bound
up with that of automatic air valve loading, and the cases of thi subclass are concerned primarily with locations of fuel inlet that will be
swept by the entering air and be influenced by its velocity head to a
considerable degree, being correspondingly less dependent on the
valve loading alone.
On page 279 (783,902, Feb. 28, 1905, Shipman) the automatic
valve is a spring loaded check form, directing all the air across the
fuel· inlet which receives none of the entrance resistance yacuum,
being located constantly at the variable throat of a rectangular venturi. A precisely similar effect in a round annular venturi is pro-

AERONAUTICS:

263

duced by the spring loaded core acting as an air valve, but not.seating tight, on page 279. (799,232, Sept. 12,1905, Gosse.) A sel)es of
swing checks are used on pages 279 and 280 (800,647, Oct. 3, 1905,
Hatcher), the fuel inlet being inside when the valves are closed and at
the throat or outside of it when they are open. A fixed circular row of
fuel inlets is located within a lifting ring, acting as a gravity loaded
automatic air valve on page 280 (859,719, July 9, 1907, Anderson),
and always outside as soon as the valve lifts. Quite the same arrangement, but with a spring loaded annular air valve is shown on page
280. (875,716, Jan. 7, 1908, Longuemare.) Two air streams acting
as one, one fixed and the other entering through an annular gravity
loaded automatic valve, are both directed by walls across the jet,
which is slightly inside, on page 280. (916,103, Mar. 23, 1909, Cartwright.) A long taper check valve in a similar long taper seat rises
very steadily with flow increase and keeps a substantially constant
vacuum, as shown on page 281. (924,200, June 8,1909, Stewart.) A
spring loaded piston operated gate valve is shown on page 282 (928,828, JUly 20, 1909, Winton), working across the air passage in the
plane of the fuel inlet which is therefore always at the most restricted and highest velocity point. The vacuum above the throttle
is used to depress or close the valve. A peculiar form of swing check
directing part of the air toward the jet and part around It as it
opens is illustrated on page 283. (973,877, Oct. 25, 1910, Pierce.)
In figure 174 (1,000,398, Aug. 15, 1911, Gentle) the spring-loaded
check lifts the fuel inlet past a baffle to keep it always in the high
velocity current, and a second swinging mixture check helps to control the direction. A somewhat similar idea underlies the different
construction on page 283 (1,042,982, Oct. 29, 1912, Sliger), where a
fixed central air jet is also an automatic spring-loaded air valve, both
streams being directed across the fuel inlet. Use of fuel inlets in the
walls of a venturi throat with a tapered central plug, tending to
keep the throat velocity constant, is shown on page 283 (1,052,051,
Feb. 4, 1913, Grimes), as a means of compensation for the enrichment tendency that is natural for such free throats where the velocity
regularly increases with flow. Of course, the satisfaction depends on
the degree to which the compensation can be carried even though
qualltatively the action may be in the right direction. The spring
load of the plug acts counter to gravity. .A. pair of cam-operated
gates, vacuum controlled, keeps the jet always in the entering stream
and makes possible any sort of rate control on the openmg, and
hence of the velocity through it as flow increases, according to the
construction on page 284 (1,093,901, Apr. 21, 1914, Wyman), of a
tapered plug in a venturi throat, with a light spring load added
to the gravity lead, is arranged to concentrate the air flow at, of
course, increasing velocities with flow increrrses, across an annular
feed inlet, the flow from which must follow the capillary law,
because of filling the fuel passage with fibrous material in the form
shown on page 285. (1,140,000, May 18, 1915, Rubetsky.) This is an
example of the effort to control the fuel -flow law, while imposing a
flow vacUUm varying with flow in a manner prescribed by the other
structural arrangements and dimensions. Comparatively recent form
of moving venturi throat, acting as an automatic air inlet gravity
loaded, is shown on page 286 (1,148,247, July 27, 1915, Moore), and

264

" •• IU,l1l.

AERO'NA UTICS.

If. l • .l.'ItlUW,

r. 't'.IIOIIJ:J,

dru,,,, .. lI~U nu II......

OAIIOl tTE L

911.692.

&JnlOh l .. Il LU . . .. . , U ...

'.te:Dted Feb. 8, 11KI8•
• 1I U ......... 'UlL

J?JJ·z

W I .8usr OIlD.
,

tv. I. ANDlt"

911.692.

,atenkld Feb.'S, 1909.

936.833.

tatented Oct. ~, le09.

1'. UT _I r.n ~

",,-YEKTor
WIll WlItWIDU

~'~~''''
A
TTOI!K'"

265

AERONAUTICS.

o:r..umit :
" . t . 'UUrORU.
OUIVUTtI".
lrrUOUIU nut II, . It. .....

I",vunoa
'MUW4ItWST'Oe

t!:F~P.£. "'...,
An OlN(Y

W.IJ ILLtTT.

1,101,736.

.

Patented .hoe ~ lilt.

/

...

....." .....,...

~
PY#U~
A.r".

266

AERONAUTICS •

... 7?UBi.

PATENTED OCT ( , liD\,
0,

r

PARMENTER.

CARBUR&TER fOR EXPLOSIVE ENOINES .
• rrUDATIOI tlLt.D. IUl.11.

Ito.

267

AERONAUTICS.

I •. , ,,...i.

O Leu&.
.

Uft!rtD 1t1fIT l'(lto&..
t. ... L. to CUISIUIf.
Oll'tJBtTtI.
u , LIUf :tr I lI.J I " L I I, U U,

• 932,466.

(NVENT'OA.

C!lru ~

S

.£licu..7Tman.

A. H.1 i..s.

A ·-!!Ou;iIm- '''~­

.~~~.

', ~
Jl.n• .".~.

A7T'ClI'V>15:):

••• 718.741.

PATtMTtD MAl te, 1I0s..
8.B. IUI.1VtLL
roB aAi NOtN£!.

OARBURCfCB

1o " ~IOUI " rl~U

un. ' ,In..

~~B.~":U

....~qu..."'~O".t.,

hrii,4U.

PlTtNttD DC'" " . Itot.

II. r. URYEtlTCB..
O&lBORtTCB. rOI tlPLOalV& EJ(QI HEIS.
U HIO&f\tlIUU UJ 11. 100'

268

AERONAUTICS.

0. O Iltll, 1
.
,1.
O. C. ntlS, h .

CoIlIntTtl.

1.006.387.

." u u,u . hut II,.

1I. IUt:'

Patented Oct.. 17,1111.

II n/ht/U",tI.H., ' , " ' .

1.006.387.

C. A. 1Iu.S.

c. .t . hAS.

eUlalma.
"'U" III, 'Hun' II UI&

932.465.

Pduted 0cl17, 1111

'atented Aug. 31. 1Q,
t.J , UII' ..., .. to.

",UU H / U 'lIn , • • ' 0..10 ..

932.46 ~ .

'~~""
~

III

,

4l'-l.-~rl'f!\n- Jf

C§l::> . "

INI'CPrOIt

',/",uJlHu s

"~~
A rTOIUI£1'

--~--------~------~--

---

269

AERONA.UTICS.

L',UUNCJ.
' ~ UG&nn.

, nUU f lll

1.095,101.

tI~n

IUtl • • , .... lIU. "

'

W. B, 0. II00III'S, It..

'''.11. \O il ,

h ttGtad ' pr.ta. lIlt
' U'4r""'J.t7 &

)J;Fl'n~e.,:

x/.f"~
Q...I;, ~

J

hlentflCl Ka, 20. IllS.

1.062.333.

In.b'e'nW~.·

.-l/t!V2';.,y. ~ner

...... ~~~
...

~~ ~

w a. 0, BIOO~S.I..
.

" . • . O. VI QOI IIS, h .

1.062.333.

- ----

eUlnrTtL
un". un,lut .lIut. lll ..

1.062.333.

-~

270

AERONAUTICS.

"" , tOYl'tlL
cwnflll.

•n"UI_toU ''''''"''''' ~''

Pa~te4Aq:.

1.lGO,202.

•

17.

~

• ... III ...... . lI l ...

~ I..S. 0UDII'f;i.

(. A.JOItNST OIt 'C. l.tOIlCUI(C«;U:-

uruut/u

l,09C),lOl.

CUAQUna.
' IUt..... U .I- .

un _n

. U . It,11I1.

PWla~.!::~~~~

.

"iF

hu~n./~

~:..ro-rd~·"

~~z,~

•

271

AERONAUTIOS •

p.lmm "I. I,

.~ 11......

ItG4

PLTtJntflll.Jt. to. Ito&.

.......U.1U,

r . cUliO' • t.. "OlInDe!.
04UUlnn rOI

rtT~l.tO I(

J. a,JO!UTOI.

1(01011:

OUIOlun rOI U,LOalYt tlel.a.

U ' UfHU . )o! . . . . .. ... I _

U?U~4nf .. t~

""""" ,_.

>iG.l

FIG .S.

''''''LIII''''

..r~J"""n..tt m

..... 'IU"

1'.l!pTtD !Pl. 3, nOt
r . OUbOK" J.. GIIUDor.
C!UUltTtI Ftlll PI:TIOLtO I( 1II0T01t.

II ... )".....

r. ClAlIlCIlI •

rATr.TtlI A,L I, I*L. GtIUDOf .

OilJOltfU' rol rtTlOLllGlill MOtOU.

.... n'H 'jl l ' I ' h l U l .. , _

vnlUlI" rnn u . .... 10...

'''''V
'IV'r~._&

~---~-".
.z.-_.q.or.~~

~

I~.~
~

.

I

272

AERON AUTICS.

umno OCt. n. \tOt.
L toLL!"
,·o..... o.nEL

..."u,uu. nut., ... ",-.

L.lomE.

o,UOlmL

uru""" nuJ UL" ~

273

AERONAUTICS.

•

i. 1 :iAr~

(/. t . M O
OJl: U!ITIL

UUO
lntL
~tl' UIUI" r l~ u

1, 980.118.

P
aLented Oec.2.uns.

n U ll. II,.,

1.108.181.

Ec "1

•

72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2-18

274

AERONAUTICS.

, ,. •I[ston

f . l .purrt.
e&uo.nu.

1,117,233.

,rulu"" 'IU''' .. I" U lt

,U""lI U

Pa1.eo\ll6JiG't. l1.lIU'

0,," 1f 0l '"

"tI'1OI1 ,

'tt.

htrutb4J 1UIo l S,191. ~
·,.n'l-hlll'

•

Flr.l .

~

S. I.

ruscon.

s. l. ruscon.

cn l YUIII,

1,143,227.

•

.,-., "c.'\I"

' Kit 'ICoI..l""

I NVENTOR

CUUUH'.

I't.tuUdJa.u 15, 191
6.

I "''''''I~!II''

"" >.11 " '"

IIU' tlCoI,'"''

l'atenttd Jutit lS,19l5.

' ''1''.....1'' •

275

AERONAUTICS.

rU1:'ltrl'-1VLJ n. U06 .

"utlmt.
un..! .. ,," ,ILD ..t.. ".1_
•. I. E.

ca na.tTtI.

"
.f(n,e4~8:

'E

':V-d."-4?~

I,vVL'NTO,N:

Jt,-~~y'

.... <..~

JJk,(~

...lU::0O

11 .: 116.121

PlltNTtD "'OG.', ItO$,

P. O. HCWITT.
OAR501£T£I. \
"HIUT10.

rI~U .ra. '.I'~

"''' •

2&e'J?7.

P.utN~ED DE1I. 5, 1105..

' " t:" 106,.3.
O. M. 8CBtBLtA.

O"'U17/1.£TtI rol aJDIO<I"aoK tIIOrOIJ.
HUI04f1OJ UI.U", N , III,

276

. .. 105..,..

AERONAUTICS •

pj,ttlftto Oto. ,. 190'.
O. )f.ICJlUUI.
OUIOltTtI ro~ BYDIOOUJOIf Moton,
unlh""

]OJ

"

• .. nl.~'.

111l"_""!.

~' ''IO

puentO Itn. 25, II",
.

I.'.

DOII'LOP, J. I. DUiLOr, J..
en lOltTU rOI cnLOSIVC £1fOI/JEL
"Ulo",n,nllnlJlI. uU

I

"~11 t9, ~'HI

II

at

,.

a.~

8,,'

.....

~K.Sc ... t.:.r..

~.
a.t.1UO'S£.

O. ". StNIIOIS,
~47.712.

Pa!.elltecl 11D. 25, 1910.

IHV~

Carr ..tt If.Hnll-iw:b

~~

1,124.918.

-y;;;;;;;;. ~tt.d..

~~~

f'ateQtedJ&lL J2.J915.

-

-

277

AERONAUTICS.

H. ; . FOGEL.
E
CARBURETER •
• PPLIOAT I Oli FILE'D lU LY 31. 190 9.

986,700.

-

Patented

~ar. l4,

1911.

- - - --

---..

- -- - - -

278

-

AERONAUTICS.

~. R. WAL I;~ .
cwalI::ru~

1.039,229.

-

-- -- --------~-~~ ~

279

AERONAUTICS.

I.,"'.101.

tiTtJttll ttl. 2', 1105.
LlI lP tiU.
ciaJ'tllrTU TOI JiIPLOIJU EHOJJtU.

"o ou~.

"TUnD ItPT. 1" 1906.-

CU'VltTtL
U~"'It'

U nlfnl.. ' I U . ' ... . . . .....

' I U' 11.1• • , 11"

; ..." . . . u" ..
=,-,;:---,,"'"

riG .L

a

FIG .2.

't,""""

PJTtll'TtD

r l~u

atn. 12. 1906.

" rEnD oct. , . ltOl
" • • • UTO!tL

A.OD&St.

ClU''Q'lIttrtl.

C,UOfttTtI.
..nIlU1U

In. '' 'ttl,

I'"IG .S,

,HUUll . . IIU . II • • ••• It"

-

280

-

- -

- -

--------~~-----..

AERONAUTICS.

PJ.rum OCT. "

UO ~.

• . &.'UnItL

' •.U'.H'

llttnn
L ,UlDtUOJ•

cn.GltTu.

my •. ,,'"

O'UII.~r:L

lIn l"U""~U 11.1 " . ' _

un l, u ' t!

"~UI

'UII. 10M.

•

~~~
1~.t:./I{~

• •. "5.7U.

UTtIl'TED JU. '. ItOL

D I. OUT"IIOIlf.
.

l • • • L(lIIIOOtMUC.

~'UIETD

C1IIOitTU rOA txr LOlfyt tlOllltl.

uruu"" 111 . . I .

' II . 11M.

rol t1J'I.OIln: DOh

.. ,,,,,,,", IIU.,,, ,. " ...

918.103.

.nu.l.

r.t.tlltoc! Illt. U , ltot

~.t .

. •.~f
"Fl"
a-~8

lVL(~U.SS('S

<!::2.-- rJJ..l.i

~9· 12...-

281

AERONAUTICS.

1. .J. 7ItJ.O
r.

..o...'tl:1UI'!',

CUlCltT:tI.
~.nllU ' I" r l u .

973,877.

"u,n , loti

924,200.

Pateot.e41aoe8. l toi.

282

AERONAUTIcs.

.. ,",' O
J.

1. "ll"fft.

culCtllnD.

'CWOltTrL

U UIUflff" ...... 'L/. 1HI

~.888 .

' atectea / ul, 20, lfOQ
..~ .ari .

--.

928.828 .

. 'n lun.. ' , ... ., .... ,_ .

P&t.lltocI IglJ20. 1001.
Hun_un,

283

AERONAUTICS.

tI'. K. Gnnt.

QaJunn.

LI. "IUat.
•

973,8n.~

.. " UUTI"fI~n ••

CU,lUlr1'O.

• £JUHUU '

uu.a

"".f.I._

~ 1,000,398.

,.t, LlI".

Pa1efItecI 'q.1S,IOIL

fHVLVTOIl

tt2-;r~a...... ,

.~~.
A rtOAH6. 'I'

c. r. nuns.

L. ILIOta.
cu u attu

CU IUJ'.Ttl.

.'nl"' J "fl~II'UII. 11I1.

1,042.982.

1.0~2.0~1.

,."U.." .. "IU'"''.'''''''

_
.....
c/t,,,~//,~ ~b.,,~

.~.9>,.~

........

284

AERONAUTICg.

H. B. WYMAN.
OARBURET1:R.
APELI0A7101l.1'ILED DEO. 6. !QU.

1,093,901.

Patented Apr. 21,1 914.

•

/0

·. c1J~"",

H.E.Wyman.

\..~.~~.

~

~------------------------------ --------------------- ---------

- -- -- -- -

285

AER ONAUTICS.

W. J. RUBESKY.
CARBURETER FOR EXPlOSI.V6 ENGINES.
APPtl CATION r l lfD OC T. H I 190 9. Rt N(WED JUNE

1,140,000.

II .

1914 .

Patented May 18; 1915.

/ N V£7VTO"p
al/LL/A'/"7 J: ,rp
V8E"..5N'Y

~rf~~

286

AERONAUTICS.

·w. "

1,148,247.

P, MOOI(,

LW. IA'f IlOW't.
C..~ . . rift.

....11''''•• '.... ........".. .

Vf'UUnufl\fI.-(I,'n,.,.. ,

1.,1 8(873.

287

AERONAUTICS.

[ . [.

WICK[~SHAM.

CAJlIURU[It,
..,'\Iun"" , n tD IAI . 21. ItU . I(U 'I (O lU I' I. illS.

t;~67,457.

Patented Jan. 11. 19\4.

288

AERONAUTICS.

another with a spring load, having also a linkage connection to an
air damper on page 286 (1,184,873, May 30, 1916, Raymond).
SUbclass 7.5, variable float-chamber pressure.-Use of a variable
float-chamber pressure in connection with a regulating airr inlet valve
is practically equivalent to the use of two compensators at once.
There are not many of such, and only one will be used for illustration,
that on page 287. (1,167,457, Jan. 11, 1916, Wickersham.) This has
an air valve, throttle controlled, which as pointed out, is not a
primary connection for flow control with variable speed engines,
as the fuel-flow vacuum is as much fixed by speed as by throat position, and in this case the float chamber pressure is r educed below
atmosphere by a connection to the mixing chamber as a correcto!r
of excessive fuel flow for high yacuum.
Class 8-0arburetors, proportioning flow, aspimting, single fixed
fuel inlet, multiple air inlets valved for regulation.-It is the general
opinion that the first systematic attack on a large scale of the problem of compensation in carburetors followed the lines of this class,
compensation by admission of secondary air, so the class is one
o
of pec" liar interest on that account. For a considerable period this
sort of compensation was the standard and in fact about the only
thing in use; and being successful, comparatively speaking, much
attention was devoted to devising more and more varied details of
apparatus, resulting in a pretty large class. It may be said that the
limitations of mechanical ingenuity, in view of the process characteristics, have only recently been recognized, and the class as a class no
longer is regarded as the only or even an adequate solution of the
problem.
Of course, there may be mixed flow or other means of compensation
associated with these multiple variable air and single fixed fuel
inlets, but these double compensations are exceptions to the standard
arrangement of the class, which is that of a fixed )?rinlary air supply
passing the fixed fuel jet, to which is added a vanable secondary air.
"
While, according to the definition of the class there may be more
than two air inlets, it will be found that in nearly all cases the multiplicity is equiyalent in effect to two, one acting as primary and the
other as secondary. The subclasses are characterized by the different combinations of commonly used means of control of the regulating air valve and by the number of such, with one exception, the
last subclass, which includes any sort of control of the regulating air
valve, provided it is associated with the mixed flow sort of compensation.
Those cases that do not clearly fall under the subclass heading , or
that might with equal propriety fall under more than one of them,
are grouped under the general class number and will be examined
first.

The general idea is that a properly regulated secondary air

inlet will by dilution compensate for the natural tendency of a fixed
fuel inlet in a fixed air passage to become over rich on increased flow.
The problem is to evolve such a control of the secondary air that as
the total flow rate increases the ratio of secondary to primary air
shall also increase and in just the right amount.
An early case of special control of the variable part of the air is
that on page 298 (751,434, Feb. 2, 1904, .r apier & Rowlidge), one of
the first of the automobile group of patents. The idea here is control

AER.ONA UTICS.

289

of secondary air with engine speed to compensate for the increased
richness tendency, and a diaphragm operates on an air-sleeve valve.
The diaphragm actuating pressure developed by a direct connected
pump, which pressure should rise with speed. Of course, difficulty
results where the engine speed varies without any change in fuel
requirements, due to a variable resisting torque.
One of the early cases of multiplicity of air inlets of the mixed sort
is that on pages 298 and 299 (828,228, Aug. 7, 1906, Menns & Menns),
in which all the air first enters tlu'ough an automatic air valve provided with a liquid dash pot, and then divides into three streams, two
of them fixed in area crossing the fuel nozzle, and therefore acting as
a single primary air, while the third varies with the throttle and acts
as a sort of secondary, being not far enough beyond the nozzle to be
et pure secondary. Another mixed case is that on page 299 (.920,042,
May 4, 1909, Pfander), where, although the secondary air is correctly located to act as such, it enters through t,yO ports, one controlled directly by the throttle and the other automatic. This case
also illustrates the idea of the warming jacket for the mixing chamber. Similarly mixed is the case on page 299 (929,260, JUly 27, 1909,
Stevens), which provides besides, the fixed primary air, two automatic secondary air inlets, both annular and concentric with the
nozzle. Two fixed air inlets, one directed directly across the jet and
the other surrounding it, both acting as primary air but to di:fl'erent
degrees, with a throttle controlled secondary air, is the combination
illustrated on page 299 (970,916, Sept. 20, 1910, Gerken).
Location of the secondary automatic air valve beyond the throttle
is shown on page 300 (1,001,969, Apr. 29, 1911, Maynard), where a
fixed fuel and air inlet discharge their mixture thro'ugh a check valve
into the body of a cylindrical throttle beyond which the secondary
air enters. Combination of compensation by throttle-controlled secondary air and by movable throat with reference to a fixed nozzle, is
illustrated on page 300. (1,019,128, Mar. 5,1912, Bulock.)
Double compensation of another sort is used in the construction
shown on pages 300 and 301. (1,020,059, Mar. 12, 1912, Schulz.) An
opening from the top of the float chamber to the mixing chamber is
constantly in action and another opening from the float chamber to
the atmosphere, is clased by the stem of the automatic secondary air
valve when that is closed, and opens with it. Accordingly the starting or low-flow rate takes place with SUbatmospheric pressure in the
float chamber and this lasts until the secondary air valve opens at
which time the float chamber pressure builds up, increasing the fuel
flow as does the nozzle throat vacuum with air flow, and the secondary air as well.
A case of combined throttle and automatic control of the air is
shown on page 301 (1,073,473, Sept. 16, 1913, Claudel), in which
there are three air ports, one secondary and two primary, and of the
latter one is fixed, while the other varies with the throttle, as does the
secondary. The air for both of the throttle-controlled ports, one
primary and one secondary, enters through an automatic valve. One
odd case is that on page 301 (1,099,086, June 2, 1914, Hamilton),
which illustrates not only an unusual air-inlet arrangement, but also
the use of a burner for heat in combination with a. proportioning
flow carburetor. An oil-burner chamber with a pilot and a main jet,
72805°-S. Doc. 550, 64-2--19

290

AERONAUTICS.

is attached to the side of the carburetor and has itself two air inlets,
one fixed and the other automatic. The main air for the engine fuel
enters through an automatic yalve and the mixture made by it passes
through a nest of fl ame-heated tubes, together with the products of
combustion of the bumer, which carry excess air. The carburetor
throttle controls the main burner jet, and compensation of proportions is expected from the tilting of the automobile carrying the device, uphill position increasing the fuel-flow head. It must be admitted that the interesting feature of this combination is rather its
suggestiveness than its practical value.
Automatic valye control of primary air with a fixed secondary,
the reyerse of the usual arrangement, is shown on page 302
(1,104,762, JUly 28,1914, Ahlberg), in which there is also illustrated
the piston type of control of the automatic valve, spring loaded, and
acted on by the vacuum at any selected point of the system, as well
as the entraining idea of a jet and throat to induce a secondary air
flow by that of the primary. A water nozzle is also shown beside
that for fuel.
Another unusual sort of thing is that on page 302 (1,119,757,
D ec. 1, 1914, Kings.) Here the primary air inlet is fi...'{ed and leads
through a mUltiplicity of crossing passages, in the course of which
the fuel is met and carried along, bemg thereby subjected to a spraying action before meeting the automatic secondary air. The action
of the primary air and fuel passages is much the same as in the
spray nozzles of some direct injection heavy oil engines. A similar
use of one of the air inlets for spraying purposes, but in a different
way, is shown on page 302 (1127,992, Feb. 9, 1915, Hartshorn),
where three air inlets are provided, a small fixed primary spraying
stream entering a tubular jacket surrounding the nozzle, a main
primary air inlet passing the nozzle, and a secondary air beyond the
last two, both entering through automatic valves of different size
and which may be different loaded. Still another case of a spraying
air stream is that on page 303 (1,123,955, Jan. 5, 1915, Tice), applied to a carburetor of the sort in which the main air HIve becomes
the throttle and the float-chamber pressure is equalized with that
at a selected point of the vacuum chamber for compensation. Here
the spraying air inlet is fixed within the fuel nozzle and its size
such as is proper to admit all the air needed for idling ",-hen acted
on by the full vacuum due to a closed throttle, or in this case airinlet valve. Here the main idea is spraying and vaporization instead of proportionality compensation, which, by reason of the
limits of the critical air-yelocity law, appears to be difftcult, if not
quite impossible. In accordance with this law the ail' flow fails to
increase when the absolute pressure on the vacuum side of the inlet
passage passes below 60 per cent in round numbers of the barometric
as it does for lesser vacua, whereas the fuel flow does increase
regularly.
Throttle control of a single main air inlet with similar throttle
control of subsequent air distribution as secondary and primary air
is illustrated onlage 303. (1,137,307, Apr. 27, 1915, Edens.) This
is a case of fixe primary air to a venturi, with secondary air controlled by throttle, and with the pressure at which both supplies
are received also controlled by the throttle to something below
atmosphere, the double air valves acting themselves as throttle,

AERONAUTICS.

291

A flat rectangular throttle arranged to always direct the entering
air across a long slot form of fuel inlet or a row of holes equivalent
thereto, with an automatic secondary air valve is shown on page
303. (1,151,989, Aug. 31, 1915, Bala sa.) This is one of the cases
where the primary proportionality is determined by the air-velocity
head vacuum on the fuel flow, with automatic air-valve compensation, the primary ail' valve being itself the throttle, and the fuel
inlets so located in front as to receive none of the air entrance
resistance vacuum.
Subclass 8.1-two air inlets, fix ed primary, throttle-controUed
secondary regulating air valve.-Compensation through a throttlecontrolled valve of any kind, as has already been pointed out, is of
little, if any, value for variable speed engines where flow velocity
is not of itself determined by throttle pOSition, however much this
may approach the truth in consta.n t speed engines. The examples
of this subclass must therefore be regarded as interesting in only
an indirect way for general-service carburetors and not as promising
or valuable schemes for any yariable speed work, though they were
used considerably in the early days of the automobile, before the
real nature of the problem was as well understood as it is to-day.
One of these early automobile cases is that on page 304 (733,625,
JUly 14, 1903, Clement), showing secondary air controlled by the
rotation of a barrel form of th[,ottle, for diluting and so compensating the mixture from a fixed fuel and primary air inlet. Similar
control by the longitudinal movement of a barrel throttle is shown
on page 304. (794,951, July 18, 1905, Schaaf & Lacy.) A combination of damper throttle and cylindrical balanced secondary air
nlve is shown on page 304 (851,285, Apr. 23, 1907, Freeman); a
damper throttle with a sector slide air valve on page 304 (954,630,
Apr. 12, 1910, Howarth) ; and a damper throttle geared to a rotating
cylindrical secondary air valve on page 305. (1,011,565, Dec. 12,
1911, Brock.) This last case also illustrates an annular form of fuel
inlet so that the fixed primary air inlet surrounds the variable secondary, which is central.
While, of course, control of secondary air with the throttle normally means that the port is actuated directly by or from the throttle,
the same result follows precisely, if both are simultaneously operated
from the engine mechanism as on page 305. (1,060,053, Apr. 29,
1913, Winkler.) Here the throttle is the engine inlet valYE~, operated
by a cam, while another cam operates the secondary air vahe at the.
same time, over a corresponding though perhaps shorter interval.
The primary air is reduced to hardly more than what will serve for
spraying purposes.
Use of a lifting tube in connection with a combined cylindrical
throttle and secondary air inlet is shown on page 305 (1,097,401,
May 19, 1914, Donndorf), where the spillage from the jet at lowflow velocities is caught in a shroud tube surrounding the nozzle,
t.he bottom of which is led beyond the throttle to maintain a steady
feed when idling, as is done so frequently in other classes of carburetors. A case of primary air direction by guides combined with
throttle control of secondary air is shown on page 306 (1,123,027,
Dec. 29, 1914, Simonson), which is also peculiar in having two sets
of holes in the top of the float chamber, one to the primary passage
beyond the jet, and the other to a low point of the secondary mixing

292

AERONAUTICS.

chamber , provided to drain back unvaporized fuel. It is a question
just how these holes will act, but it is clear th at they will result in
&ome modifications of float chamber p ressure and theref ore of fuel
control.
.
Two dampers linked together, one as throttle and the other as
secondary air valve, are shown on pages 306 'and 307 (1,148,898, Aug.
3,1915, Henley), which case also has two other peculiarities. In the
first place the primary air is so small in amount as to be practically no
more than spraying air, exerting little control on the amount of fuel
flow, but some, and, second, the entrance of the secondary air is
guided by curved vanes to produce a vortex at the jet to secure a
main control of fuel-flow vacuum. One of the most recent cases
and of peculiar form is that on page 307 (1,183,273, May 30, 1916,
Atherton), which has a secondary air valve linked to the throttle,
both of damper form but with an automatic valve to control the
amount and the velocity of the secondary air that shall pass the out let of the primary air and its fuel or completely by-pass it.
Subclass 8.~-Two air inlets, fi xed primm'y, automatic secondary
regUlating air valve.-As a subclass this is a very large, if not the
largest one of all, which is not unnatural, considering the scope it
offers to the mechanically ingenious. T he principle is entirely sound
and correct qualitatively; and this coupled with the fact that compensation by adding an automatic secondary valve, the simplest form
of which is the spring-loaded check, seems a simple, cheap, and
easy thing, is responsible for the flood of inventions along this line.
The difficulty is one of degree, because the compensation means must
be not only right in principle but must be so also in amount, and
the real problem is one of design of secondary air valves in form,
size, and especially in loading so they will give just the r ight compensation and keep it so, without variation throughout the life of
the carburetor. No better example of the inadequacy of invention
alone without the quantitative relationships of design, distinguishing it from invention, could be found, than this class so voluminous
as to invention and so unsatisfactory as to practical commercial
results in proportion to the effort expended.
One of the early cases of this subclass, that on page 30 (649,324,
May 8, 1900, Longuemare) associates an automatic secondary air
valve of annular form, concentric with the primary, with a fuel inlet of several slots cut in the face of a tapered plug on a matching
seat, the fuel inlet being located in a short straight primary air
t ube generally termed a choke or strangle tube. A somewhat similar f orm of fuel inlet arranged in the wall of the primary air passage and associated with a cross-flow automatic secondary is shown
on page 209 . (759,001, fay 3, 1904 Mohler.) One of the most important of the cases of this class, page 308 (785,558, Mar. 21, 1905,
K rebs), uses a balanced secondary air valve operated by a spr ing
and diaphragm, contr olled by the vacuum in the secondary air passage. T his case is interesting because the inventor 'Was the first and
most vi~orous advocate of t his t ype of compensation and by his
publicatlOns on the subject was r esponsible more t han any other individual f or the st imulation of world-wide interest in the class. An
automatic secondary air valve loaded by the buoyancy of a float in
mercur y is shown on pages 308 and 309 (802,216, Oct. 17, 1905, .Johnston) , which at once calls attention to the problem of valve loading.

AERONAUTICS.

293

It is evident that if proper compensation is to be attained with the
normal arrangement of fixed fuel inlet in a primary air-choke tube,
the secondary air must increase in proportion to the total, and this
r equires a variable loading with opening, which can not be obtained
by gravity alone might be, but is difllcult with springs alone, could
by combination of links and cams with gravity and spring forces,
or by their equivalent, buoyancy against float shape. The rest is
matter of practicability.
An annular spring-loaded automatic secondary air valve is shown
on page 309 (810,792, Jan. 23, 1906, McIntosh), which has a peculiar
element. The choke tube is of the tapered form and is part of the
air valve, so the fuel inlet finds itself at a wider part of the choke
tube when the secondary lifts than before. This makes the compensation double, first, by secondary air in the ordinary way, and,
second, by the variable throat and nozzle relation itself. A flat-ring
form of air vahe is shown on page 309 (831,832, Sept. 25, 1906,
Coffm), which on lifting supplies a double air stream, one directed
toward the center and the other outward, and only the latter is truly
secondary; because the former by its velocity across the fuel inlet
acts substantially as does the primary air in inducing fuel flow.
As an example of loading by means of a combination of links and
springs to secure a particular rate of opening with vacuum, the form
on page 310(835, 80,.l: ov. 13,1906, Clement) is of interest.
An attempt at direct relation hip of secondary air to total mixture
is found on page 310 (856,958, June 11, 1907, Huber), where the
secondary air valve is balanced and not affected by the vacuum at
all, but is moved by a floating spring-resi ted check valve in the
main stream of mixture, the lift of which is more or less directly re.lated to the total flow.
All of the previous cases in which the secondary air valve is
opened b~' the vacuum use the vacuum at a point beyond the primary
mixture inlet, usually at an enlarged chamber where the velocity is
low, but in the following case there is a departure from this practice.
On page 310 and 311 (860,848, July 23, 1907, Bowers) the primary
mixture discharges from a restricted orifice in the center of the throat
of a larger venturi tube, and through the annular space thus formed
the secondary ail' enters after passing its automatic valve. The
vacuum at this high-velocity point controls the opening of the automatic valves instead of that at some more distant chamber or lowvelocity point.
An indirectly loaded secondary air valve is shown on page 311
(888.487, May 26, 1908, Greuter), where a simple lever and spring
are used instead of a direct spring, but with no different force or loading characteristics. Arrangement of the secondary air valve at the
highest point with a long vertical primary mixture lifting tube is
shown on page 311 (88 ,965, May 28, 1906, Delanay-Belleville),
which is of interest not because of any peculiar compensating value,
but because of its adaptability to low-volatile fuels now so common
and which are difficult to handle at low-flow rates because the velocity
is not high enough to lift the unvaporized liquid when, as is usually
the case, the float chamber must be set low. Recognition of one of
the practical difficulties of the automatic air valve is found on page
312 (912,083, Feb. 9, 1909, Daley), where there is provided a liqmd
dash pot to dampen the movement of the automatic air valve. The

294

AERONAUTICS.

fuel is itself the dash-pot liquid, and the valved form is used, permitting free downward movement corresponding to flow increase but
restricted upward movement. An unusual form of fuel inlet is also
shown, an annular slot formed between a rod and a concentric hole in
a plate. The form of the air valve with its long tapers is also a
recognition of the need of a graduated opening with vacuum. A
tSpecial form of spring loading for the automatic air valve is shown
on page 312 (927,529, July 13, 1909, Harrington), where a flat flexing spring with an adjustment for its free length is provided. L ocation of the automatic air valve in a side chamber, a pretty common
arrangement in the later forms, and the use of the tapered primary
air-choke tube, also more and more frequently adopted later, are
illustrat€.d on pages 312 and 313 (928,042, July 13, 1908, Goldberg).
An interesting form of graduated air valve is that shown .in figure
222 (932,860, Aug. 31,1909, Groubille & Arquembourg), where a number of metal balls of varying size constitute the air valve, or, rather, a
set of air valves of different size and opening resistance, and these
are shown as associated with the venturi form of primary inlet. Another example of ball-type air valve is shown On page 313 (974,076,
Oct. 25, 1910, Kingston), where the balls arc all the same size, but
their seats are of different diameters.
A special valve-loading mechanism is illustrated on page 314
(976,558, Nov. 22, 1910, Dayton), a sort of clock spring and gear
train, and another still different on page 314 (976,692, Nov. 22, 1910.1
Riechenbach), this latter associated with a swing form of valve and
introducing cams to secure the force variation required with reference to vacuum and valve opening. Flexing flat spring strips over
slots to make an automatic air valve are shown on page 315 (997,233,
July 4, 1911, Bowers). Control of the automatic all' valve by the
vacuum at the throat of the primary venturi instead of that beyond
it, on the theory that this throat vacuum is itself a measure of air
flow and can properly be made a prime factor in the motion of the
air valve, is illustrated on page 315 (1,067,502, reissued as 13,784,
Aug. 4, 1914, Brown).
The long curved shape of the valve face itself acts in a manner
equivalent to a cam type of valve loading and a somewhat similar
idea of valve face form used with direct spring loads against the main
mixing-chamber vacuum is shown on pages 315 and 316 (1,069,671,
Aug. 12, 1913, Brush), associated with a direct-acting lifting tube
by-passing the throttle. A differential form of air valve is shown
on page 316 (1,071,858, Sept. 2, 1913, Ball & Ball) ; also direct spring
loaded and opened by main mixing-chamber vacuum, but having a
quite small fixed primary air inlet, in which is a special form of fuel
inlet, a capillary annulus formed between a long tapered wall and a
('orresponding rod.
An example of two automatic secondary air inlets which in action
are equivalent to one is given on page 316. (1,0 6,287, Feb. 3,1914,
Gehrmann.) An automatic air valve form adapted to be influenced to
the maximum degree by the velocity of the pa sing air is shown on
page 316. (1,092,282, Apr. 7, 1914, Mix ell.) Here the reversal of flow
direction .produces a reaction assisting the opening and equivalent
to an increase of vacuum or a decrease of spring tension. Doublespring loading of the automatic air alve is shown on page 317
(1,112,257, Sept. 29, 1914, Brush), where the second spring comes

AERONAUTICS.

295

into action to increase the loading after the valve movement has
exceeded a given value. It also illustrates again the high-point location of the air valve with a long lifting primary tube for low float
chambers. The primary and secondary streams approach the throttle
from opposite directions, and the throttle itself distributes the mixture to four cylinders by four ports, each feeding a separate mixture
passage. Heating of the secondary air between the valve and the
mixing point is illustrated on page 317 (1,140,064, May 18, 1915,
Rakestraw) , which also shows a heated and baffled mixing chamber.
Such heating, if not quite constant, causes a variable expansion of
the air, affecting flow as would a varying resistance of passage, and
this interferes with proportionality.
A sort of floating automatic secondary air valve is shown on pages
317 and 318 (1,143,961, June 22,1915, Haynes), formed somewhat like
a perforated nozzle cap, the J?rimary air being fixed by the holes in the
cap and the secondary varymg with its lift. There is also shown a
wick air humidifier in the primary air. Electrical heating of both
the air and the fuel separately in connection with an automatic air
,alve of the clock form is illustrated on page 318 (1,150,619, Aug. 17,
1915, Percival & Patterson), one of a large number of cases where
the attention being concentrated on the problem of applying heat to
vaporize heavy fuels has led to the introduction of proportionality
interferences by variable back-pressure effects in the case of the air
and variable viscosity and efflux effects on that of the fuel.
With the idea of promoting acceleration on a sudden ol?ening of
the throttle, a special form of throttle carrying the automatlc secondary air valve has been arranged, as shown on page 318. (1,162,576,
Nov. 30, 1915, Daimler & Slaby.) A quick opening of the throttle
by a sort of dashpot action momentarily closes the secondary air
valye and enriches the charge accordingly, but immediately afterwards the position due to the vacuum is taken up automatically.
This is equivalent to the accelerating cup, except that it acts equally
at any position.
Subcla8s 8.3-Two air inlets, both 'with regulatinr;. valves, one (JJlJ,tornatic, the other throttle controlled.-One case WIll serve to illustrate this unimportant mixed class, that on page 319 (1,060,545, Apr.
29, 1913, Gentle), which has the main primary air entering through
an automatic valve and the secondary controlled by the throttle. A
peculiar form of fuel inlet is provided, characterized by capillary
flow, which consists of a wire screen in a narrow annular slot, the
screen being cylindrical and carried by the automatic valve.
Subclass 8.4-Two air inlets, both with automatic regUlatitng
valves.-As compared with fixed primary air, the case of primary
air entering through an automatic valve with a fuel inlet beyond it
would require rather less compensation for proportionality because
of the increasing area of air entrance which directly tends to retard
excessive rise of vacuum, especially with gravity loaded valves as
compared with spring loaded. In fact, with a gravity loaded primary air valve and a fixed fuel inlet beyond it insufficient fuel will
enter at high flow rates unless some special arrangement is introduced
to force it, because the increase of vacuum and hence fuel flow, with
reference to air flow, is negligible. With spring loaded valves having
an increasing tension there may be required more or less compensation which might be obtained with a secondary spring load. In gen-

296

AERONAUTICS.

eral, there is likely to be rather too much trouble and difficulty in getting a proper sprmg loading £01' one valve to warrant trying it with
two, so this subclass is one o£ doubtful practical value, though within
the range of qualitati,e po ibility. L ocation o£ the fuel inlet at or
before one o£ the automatic air valves is one more or less common
special arrangement where the case is least complex.
In the form page 319 (762,707, June 14, 1904, Grove) the fuel
inlet is in the seat of the primary automatic valve. If, as is most
often the case, it may be assumed that this "Valve when it opens at all
opens full against its stop then this is equinlent to a fixed fuel and
a fixed air inlet arranged for gravity flow of fuel for slow- peed
engines. The secondary air being automatic, the case is one that
might be assigned to the subclass 8.2, as adapted for periodic opening
of a fuel ,alYe with pressure feed.
With the arrangement on page 320 (790,173, May 16,1905, Biehn)
the situation is quite different, for here a double nI,e with a single
spring load operates so as to decrease the primary air as the secondary
air increases, the former being controlled at the outlet point of the
primary air and its fuel. Location of the fuel inlet in the path of the
primary air entering throuO"h an automatic vah-e, gra,ity loaded so
as to receive the direct velocity head vacuum action which should be
nearly constant, is illu trated on pages 320 and 321. (806, 301 Dec.
12, 1905, Packard.) The secondary air opens after the pnmary
opening has exceeded a given value, and a single nhe controls both
openings. A pair of conically helical spring, forms of vahe is shown
on page 321 (960,080, May 31, 1910, Fay & ~llsworth), with the fuel
inlet located in a fixed air passage in front o£ one of these pring
automatics, which controls the primary air at its outlet. This arrangement so far is equinlent to a fixed air and fuel with an outlet
throttle and tends to become rich, so a secondary air valve is a corrective. In this case the tension of both spring valves is subject to
hand control so they may be made to seno as throttle.
e
A somewhat odd case, having a fuel inlet in the seat of one automatic (as in 762,107, Grove), is that on page 321 (1,136,675, Apr. 20,
] 915, Hutchinson), where special means are provided between the two
valves for separating out and drawing away the unvaporized fuel.
This shows the later recoO"nition of the prevalence o£ nonyolatile
fuel and the necessity for some means of dealing with the unvaporized
liquid portions, but a rather questionable way, because any fuel thus
drained away is re ponsible for just so much interference with proportionality otherwise established by the flow . This r eturned liquid
being the heavier portion, it can not be used again in the same sort
of carburetor with any more hope of vaporizing the second time than
the first , in fact, less.
One example of an anangement that requires rather less than
more compensating action of the secondary air valve is shown on
page 321 (1,183,137, May 16, 1916, wart) . Here the taper throat
of the primary air passage lifts automatically, thereby tending to
compensate directly, and the secondary automatic air ,alye is expected to do the rest. The effect of this anangement should be similar
to those of subclass 8.2.
Subclass 8.5-Two air inlets, both with throttle controlled regUlating valves.-With the reminder that such direct throttle control is
only, or mainly, of interest in connection with constant-speed engines,

AERONAUTICS.

297

this class assumes but small import ance in the general carourewr
case, which includes the variable-speed engine.
Two air valves acting as throttle and so formed as to be really a
double-ported ingle vah-e is the arrangement on page 322 (714,597,
Nov. 25, 1902, Mol's), originally intended for automobiles. The next
case ( 856,638, June 11, 1907, Higgins), is one of those designed for
stationary engines and has two air inlets, one increasing and the
other decreasing with the throttle, so arranged as to control the
vacuum at the fuel inlet. A double-ported slide valve, acting as
air valve and throttle, has a fuel nozzle in front of one in the
port that ser-ves as a primary air passage, while the second port
controls the secondary air simultaneously in the construction on
page 322. (846471, Mar. 12, 1907, Hobart.) The same case illustrates a double-beat. disk valve and a damper valve acting in the same
way. A cylindrical slc8Ye, constituting the tapered air throat by its
two sets of ports, acting as throttle and auxiliary air valve, and its
free and acting as primary-air valve, is illustrated on page 322.
(905,012, TO'- . 24, 1908, Spranger.) The motion of the throat, with
reference to the jet nozzle is itself a compensating influence, leaving
less for the primary and secondary air ports to do.
A sliding semicylindrical plug throttle moying across a pair of
air ports, one of "hich carries the fuel inlet, and thereby controlling
the total air and the ratio of primary to secondary air is sho"n on
page 323. (988,800, AprA, 1911, McHardy & Potter.) Two damper
valves arranged to act at the same time as air vahes and throttle
may be made to accomplish at least qualitatively the desired compensation for constant speed engines when arranged as on pages 323
and 321 (1,014,328, Jan. 9, 1912, Podlesak.) A double air passage
has a damper in both branches, so linked together as to give the compensation desired, the fuel nozzle being located in one of them as as to
receive the velocity head yacuum of one of the four air streams formed
by the dampers.
Subclass 8. 6~ixed fiow .-One very early case of the direct sort
of compensation that is po sible by the mixed flow principle, but used
in conjunction "ith a yariable main air inlet to minimIze the total
drop in pressure through the carburetor as compared ,,-ith the class
where the main air inlet is fixed is that on I age 32:5. (123,214,
Mar. 11, 1890, Butler.) H ere the main air enters through a spring
loaded automatic val '-e while the fuel enters in an annular stream
around the outside of the seat of the main valve where the velocity
is high. Compensation is secured by air flow to the fuel passage at
a pomt just behind its outlet. Another case involving the same
principle of compensation, but differently arranged, is that on page
325. (802,038, Oct. 17, 1905, Hagar.) A more recent case, and one
of some interest, is that on page 325 (1,061,835, May 13, 1913,
Gobbi), where the fuel inlet is set before the one yalve that acts as
air valve Or throttle. This valve has a hole in it registering with
the fuel inlet for idling on closed throttle, air for which enters
through a side hole in the throttle itself. On opening the throttle
suddenly part of the large air flow is caught by a hood and directed
down a shroud tube around the nozzle, emptying it of fuel that collected during slow feed. This accelerating cup action is followed by
a mixture proportionality compensating action when this same air
enters the fuel nozzle through which the accelerating cup was filled.

- -- --

298

- - -- --

-------- -------~------~--~~~~

AERONAUTICS.

PJTtlm rtL t, ltot."

If•• 151,""

.. ;:11.4U.

aI. L UPi Ca .. .... I . ao'WLtDOt.

CUIO'IUCJ to. '51101. W
010U .
• " UUlIu " utOln. M., ...

"ttllttu
W L lUPIU .... 1. IOwLcDOt.
.
enlOatTtI fOI '£TIOL " OTOllS.

Ill. " hai. I J

o

~ ..... ,

..."eo .....

~~,,)i;~.{
-' •. 1u,ul.

ti1tllltD
V. I . SUIU .. " . 1. I OWLCDOC.

CU.OltTtI

roa rcn OL 1III0r ou.

• ,UIUlltll1 t n . " , " . 1011.

r

o

ru." 1.0••

~

r , ...... o- e~~.

!;..........,,,_.

~~."O.Y

1f.'ffi:221.

•. w. !

W,

.,..,9#
.......... _

...

~'
"-~Le.!:, ... ..,.:'O~

r. KclflfS,

httlfTtD 10'0, 1,

U' ~I' "~:O~~~l~;~~;'. ION.

Ito&

11I11t ..... 1I" ...

299

AERONAUTICS.

O .rho'"
.
.......tt...

lno •• mu."T OOT'EUU GUSOJn1L

I'1T}JIltll 'ltlD, ',lIoC

to"

1. tv:
l . lItt"'''
CAlIOlnU.

920,6411.

AU"""""''' .'' II,''''''

.,nlh, . .. UUt.u ... . _

1. " . I'1't'?tIl'1.
tUIOltn;L

l.. D. OtJltM.
.en' Oln~

6,lUlf.flUrUU . . .. I . I _

m 0 ... UGtnl.

unl".' ,,, nHt AU, "', 10'.

970,916.

~-.;.~:~'
:».,~..:.:;:::~..(O~

300

AERON AUTlCS.

t . 1UYMU\);

'C. MHlUn.

CIUCltTtI.,
"" ~IUIIII

llua

(lIUOura..

un. II. 111"

hC&ted Aag.29:nlil
, .. u,.....U1' ...

.
.,nIUflOIf.U • • lrf. lf,UI,.

htecW'!ag. 20. un1.

1,001,969.

".........

.,8~
.........
-

t.o aD LOCI.

1,019.128.

w. r.!C!IJLZ.

"'ll~&T~::~~~' '~"Il.

F
P:rrNCS.7E.:7.'

~...".

'/11-.,$114'

~"U OHI" rl~n

1,020,009.

...

",1111.
'Patented Mar 1 19ft.
2,

301

AERONAUTICS.

'.IJ.

IT r SC!ltlLZ.
(' . nCUftA,

. tnr...JIOIII1U'J '

Paltuletl M.,, 12, 11I 12.

1.020.059.

R. CLiODt!..

c.u..euTtI.

U 1\IUIlUIIH • .,. ",lItC

III1"

Pll.tlltNSept.l8.llIl:t.

1.073.473.

1," (,."'·1 11""

.1. S. BUlIL10H,

T,S. UlitILTO~.

1.099,086.

11'/71>1£$$£$

cr""..~

~~ .

Pal.enl.ed JWle2, Iliit

PaI.eIlI.edJllQe2,ln,

302

AERONAUTICS.

G. A.

r. !lLaUo.
T. " . IIIfO&

1.119,7G7,

O.

1.127.99Q.

w BUnBOII'f.
.

C. "'.8UTSBQlltf.

c,ua_btl.

" U ' " "''II~nU I''. II' ''

1.127,992 ..

hleuted reb.1I1 18!a.
'11I" ..... Ll' ..•·

303

AERONAUTICS.

p, S. Tlct.
C'''aUTI:I..

H. If. (DElfs..
t.U ~ 'llil.

...,,,,,,•. ,,,u._.,.,I0,,.

u n,U lltJ tu.u.U .. Ill"

1.123.9 ~ ~.

Pall'Dttd Apr. 27.

1,137,307.

\Y'Tnt.M~

~X"~.

~g--"":'~

•
'.ULASS".

r

..,,,,U,,.. "11"10 ... " ...
1.1~1 .9 89.

1.1~1 .9 89 .

l

'Al"'SS~

Im~

304

.... 73M2!.

AERONAUTICS.

J'A.TElTtD mT u..l . l.
A t. IOB.ur Ii: V /:. LJer.
.
.

u!tITt» Jon 1(, 11OS.
I.. CLCMENT,
DUIID'RtTClrol MOTOR IIOrCL£I,

C1.1II0RtTtl.
IPUIUUtJ rl~U u r 1.1_

. "U' HIIIIII.U"" .. I ....

•
Ito. 85un

A. !OW.lRT!.

UTttI'Tto J.n. 2~ It07.
L. C, tlttMn .
OUIOltTtR rOI .i.H tIPLOalVt ClIOIIf£.

",I.IU,". tll,U." U I...

,u.mtt<L
lInl ..n .. ,u.n I n 4.1 _

9~4.630.

Pntented Apr. 12.11110.

305

AERONAUTICS.

1." n ooL

1I0el.
cuau a.nn.

&. 4.
A' nlf U 1U

1,011,666.

rlt"

P&tented Dec. I!, III1L

P. DOIlJDoar

1,060,053 .

, U'..IUfIUIIUDrll. II,U' ..

IMv'entor:'l

Otto Win Kler;

By~ ..tJ-:-:

o'!tt'y

72805 °--S.])oc. 559, 64-2----20

_

IIU .. l"t

1,011,666.

306

AERONAUTICS.

f

e.,u,ollllil

I .C.IUtOnt":

Pat.ent.4 Dec.29. 19J(

1.123.027.

~

;.........

Jg"a.n (ffiO,f't) SUnQDun

B~~~Y.~

........

J.V,II[II'l[Y.

.r&~lltM

1.123.027.

.

J;kIc. 29, 1014.

" U CU-f_ ti.
lll

;1.._.....
Ja'\\.oI\CnQI"\U SlfT\QMtn

B~~ r. ~

.L V.IIUfUY.

307

AERONAUTICS.

J. l.AtM[UON.

1.186.1173.

"It.loIlb,oo,191&

1 "y .. )j[HHV.
,

,.Y,IIJ/jUY.

UUU'(1U.

Cd1U1I111.

1,148,898.

U'iI\,U, ... '''U .... II,''' ..

1, 148,898.

"' ~~1I"

""" ....U'" ,)

-jiZ,.{O.

308

AERONAUTICS.

I .. 750,001.

¥lVV[ L. l O UUlAIIl.
IlG
CUtU. U "

1
_

C. M. MOBLtl.
Cllllllt'ttl rOlltOIOCUlOI trOtU!.

,.. U 'U, IVl tl lll l • .

.... ·.. ','-,

.. n" H I"

rlltl'fltD
~.n&lL

OILttfOIlI'I;.
"n,"I'"

II~U

IIn. ... . Nt'

w.o. 21. 1905.

,,~u

"If IL " ...

I.!. JOBMSTOto,

r.HuTto OCl. 17,

IfJ~.

CUIDlltTtIlrolBtDIOCARIOlitlfOIN-ts.
." U . . " U IIUI.u, "

lUI

.Inn.... ur ••

309

AERON AUTICS.

1I '.802.2lt

J. B. JOBSnOH.

'Utl/TtD DOT. 1'1, 1I0$',

h I02,:
m

C:U BUltTtR TOR RtDRoCAnON tHOI HtI.

, rr uuuI' IIU'UFf

J. II JORlinON

PATtNTtD OCT n , 1901

(J.kIOtnER fOR HTDROCAItB(lN tHOIfH'

10. 1111,

ar UIC U ,u ,nUH't "'101)

JigJ

.'''~{1~",('.JI •
.16-,

-

N~-.i~

.11

G

"
'fIlIP/': '
.r'5- ,
,,'
]J

'

)

on"

n" _=::;:_~

,1V,r",rc#

""''''''YAJjIJ

....z.A.~Ii1V'd,h.+Jr./(eNv

_--e:~

, ......£"",(1..
...rwi",/It.~.rJn..r'l!.1V

'"

f4f~~

.... "a,1'.

UTtNTtD

U~.

2'. tiCs.

I . KdHOsa.
Cl.lIoiUtR'.
.. 'I.lUlInnLIt.fI. fl. II ...·

/1I ~I/lI()"

JaJfI",.Af'CIn tl.lA.

"r~
A"" bItI

" •. 131.131

UUIfTt D UP!. 25, ttol.
B. t . corn II.
CUBDRtTEl f Da atOROCUIOI tIIOIHtS .

310

AERONAUTICS •

tr., ~n,,,,,

-rlTt9m IOf.

U,tlO~

., •. m,ut

" ,'oLE.tIIT.
CU IIlltttL

UUllfeD lUlU 11,
T. IUIU!"
on.oiETta'rol BJDIOU UOI tlOllI'tI,
•

un'U1. "

nUl . ... .. II", •

113'
_

.I ...un"u,ln.

1 110,148.
ft.
If.:-1U,IV

UUllttD HI M tI, lt01.
&

T. IIIICI.
Ou.,altttl r OI ll'fDIOtU'O!t U GHn:1.
IP nltulu fll,. , I" to 11M

r,t. lo"ns.
O, nOltTtI.
" HIC U I " ' I ' U •• II "~'n.

311

AERONAUTICS.

. .. 850;.U.

r. E. JO " tu. .

0: L OltOTtL

OAI.altTCI.

cnnlt1'tI.

","LItU I I I 'ILU I U. U . II.., •

.

UUIUf/ .. nUl Jan I . I ....

"

r

W ITNESSES,

fJ.('~
.9 . (?~.

h ..... e5.

PlltNTtD illY 2'. UQl.

L. K . O. DtLUflUT.ltLLtvlLLt.
..AOtOIUTIC CUBOltTER rot EIPLOSIVI: KOTOIS. .

If"

.;,:W.

PUtHTtD XU". 1'01.

Lilli. O. OtLJ.OIf.at·IELLtvILLt.
,OTOMlTIO e n lDltTU r OR ElPLOSIVE III OTOII •

rlLU . t.I . ... u ...

.,n l~ Ul "

, . 'LlfUl l l rILU I Ln . H . \On •

.L7U.-'e/Z!'~
~""'//r. ~..D..L"u.{""~~.+..A

d-XAS
~

.uzv<n."J!oT'
.J:Ou.a..J"~..:..d. . .r~-aa,.~~..

d-'&'.tS
~.

: -- - --

-

-

~--

---

312

AERONAUTICS.

rt,T,UIlIIMotOI.

~ ." . 1. DAtn':

.,'u fI"u r" U» .... II.

912.088.

U ...

. :1. $. OOLlIItIO.
_

I.'. COLDltlO.
('U .uItTo.
I 'Hr.. u .. IIU.' ... . I . .....

,'UOl.tTD.

dU IU TltlIIU.' U . '.I,..

,tot

hLellted JuIll 3.
••'u~ ... ~\.

IIOI--\---U "

~

••

PlP.eIlCbd JdlI!3. liOt.

..,.,,.. F.... ' ....

928.042 •

313

AERONAUTICS.

J ~1.

I." GOtDltl(l.

aOLDJtlO.

cwntTn.
",-HIll!' J.' "'U ,,,,,,,. .

PWDted

9Z8•.
04lI.·

•

p, J, OIOOVtLLtl t . 8'. AlQlJtVB0010.
C.lun.rrDTo.J.m• .u.c:onDnlOJDlOtJD.

932,860.

Pa~lIted

U!. 31. J~.

974,078.

J~

It lDOt.

"' U~ 'U'"

r. L

I(WOSTOII .
htNII.odOct: ~,l'lCt

314

AERONAU TICS.

1.V. Duro"_
UI

~'~~,~~~~.~:. ~:~~~

976,Cs(~8.

Neated

Ifcrd:2.

,,,0.

~-~

.~"" . ~.

,.., . ;S~~

--.,.,

B. lit I!)WIElfUCIf.

J . Y. ItICltHUCB.
tUIIIUtn.

976.'699.

H nluun'HUUl..l. 1111

PateDt.i No'. 22. l ilQ.

315

AERONAUTICS.

r. t.

lOW

us.

r. t . JO"EU.
Patented.;Jnl,4. l lI ll

997.233.

',lIn_IU' •. ,

997.233.

t . JlO"!lt.
c, uunn.

l , P Blosa.
.

J.

."UU,jfl '".~

.".It.

CU\=IUTti.
UIL

u nIOUlu,n.U JoI. "

1.069.671.

11 11.

P.~nted

Aug. 12. llua •
l ,uJtHun ...

~
'

-~I

••

J:

J

.I

U

Jrzv~nt'r.

)l........o.Q.....4
.. ~Jt..,..s..,..

ItU!l{(l
g

:

-

- - - - - - --

-

316

- --

-

- - -- - -- - -

- -

ABRON.A.UTICS.

noS!
............

l. P.

"" u,ul"n~I

r •. • r. o, liLt.
UII"tTU..

..... u,lll"

1,069,e7l • .

· htt,a\.ed!ur.I2,Wl
.

.nun ...

n.u'

1.0'71,8~8.

~nlf'."" ' rlU.h'. Ii.ll>"

, .........,.,1191!.

Jr!v~n/or

-I'_(7(J".J.

~. ~J/~

Attomey.

p ouurull
.

1,088,287 .

" f.- M
Inui:"
Pai.elltfd rtb.3,III4

Pa~tacI.lpr.7.19I l

~'
.{v...... j~jt.......u.,

, ~~

317

AERONAUTICS.

Ii" 8ROSH
. llt .. r tD " L' I.CI . .. . uTlIt rOll. T t.) · ~eolllcnIO'uOI. tI.

A rUUSK

.IUOIt.la"UI~O .. ,"'Ul 0l

rot

ll1lt1UI colt.c nlll, UOL'ts

PaUDl6d Sepl.28. III It

1.112,207

. IIUII·''''' '

., .• ",.,4, "",.", ""

1.1l2,2~1

.-Z)Ol/Cl Il'"i"o r

O'a....<

c,.P_J-"':'"

"""!"
lI. l , RAK[Slk",.,

...",..... ""',..... ....

C~" UlrTrl

1,140,064.

1,143,961.

~ .........

.( r(X:;../

1~-

~

,",_nns

I ..-:' ;<· J~
m.lJ~

.'r..teu!«l}lUIo U, 19J;1
I ....

,>-.. u, ..

~

318

AERONAUTICS.

C ' . NAVfrlU.
.

l.U3.9~l'.

.

" " " tu,~ .\.l . W ' JtTU SOk.
,
~1. ~U~f tUU ' "Il"

O
'P\'U"h''''.,un,'''''
htmlIfi JIlDI tt,lM4,
... nlO..... ocr .. .

1.leO.619.

' : OAllollO , . , $("I'I'.
l .nTTU rAUl '" c~" .. nul.

••... \C.·".· ,'oIU .. ·.'.. IIII.

'1,162,&76,

Ne~I'U.s,u.s :

.

'~

'-Z~

""""'''.' ''''' ''''','01"

Paltll~ ! Q8. 17, I VI "

319

AERONAUTI CS.

W.

w GEnt&.
,

Cl4UlllfftL
U",UUltfUUIIU, II .10\:

1.060; ~.4~ .

IF.i$'~ '

30

11122

PU£MftDJ'OlIth.lf04.
1. 010it.
OJaIUUfti roB IXTtlHH OO""UnIOlf tHOJ'U.
urUOUI U lIUI eoT• • ' , Uti.
Inun..4 1I1f l .

ml:1'WM~.

• oc.;.-,i"-->(

.r~ . X«.,..

~

P4nntD·ronT(.1I~

If•• 78:,101.

1. 01l0Vt.

OUJUJltTtB :.c!~l:!;'~~~L~; :.~l~?!~IOIf &1101111'.1.

- --

-

320

1 0.

- --

- --- - ---

----- --------------------------------~--~------

AERONAUTICS.

e~e,no.-

! o.IO',UIiI.

1. W
.UG'lUD.
.
W
lltl UO V.'OlJZtl rOI BTOIOCU.OIl tH Olla:
H HtUUU

tnu , n

J. "."'O, ,,IIO.

MII U 'Io IfD UPOllZU
"' ~IQ . fI U

ll1.IM"

roa

PAnlfT£D DtC. It. UD6,

BTD10CUJO H tJI 0l MtI.

IIL.U10ilU.

n ...

29

••

0

&
47

#.S

o

•

~'6

:M
l~
21~_'~
cI'1'n"' -..<
......

~~-..

'HtNTtI) Mn 18, 1I0S.
r.l. IIEU.
on'Guru rOI tXPLOSIVE tKOUt&.
.,rUUfIU 1111.* UI I. U".

PlTtlttD It&T If, l lO~

1,*,711),11'.

OUIUltT£1

P, l.IIEU.
ro. tlPLOUvt tHGlerp.

u nlu l l .. ' IL.U . ......

U.,.

321

AERONAUTICS.

,, '. SWAnS::

t , lIutClltllSOIl.

Pateatod IU, IG. 191& :

1,183,137.'

1,136,676.

'-'
-:.O'I .... .u

,
'f. 1. ru61 . ... tI.LlWOltil

•

~U1U.

UHlu tln

n ~u

IU

.

• ., .....

960,080.

fITtNT~oC

I toe,no ·
It.

J. " . U C
IAIID.
ru 8lDIOC UIOII' t1fOHIts.

. lUlU ANO V.f.POIIZtl

"n l' If I "fI~"" IC", lO ",

r..:s·1.·

72805°-8. Doc. 559, 64-2-21

322

AERONAUTICS.

. .. 7iUd

'1t:'" M.'n.

(.

..'1..,.,....n:lfn:

l . P. 110...

' t,u IUn,,'tltUI'1." l f( I UaU.

'K't'f:HnIIt

~J\:,.~;;'~.

,"",,-~om.- """

''' 'l'\.''f'~
~

''JfrvnM..<LUIJl",w'''l

A r"Tl'A'....

.AT
J~

P4nUtD w. u . 12.

r. 0. BOUlt.
r Ug OOVtJ,1I01 f'OlOIL tll'OHItJ.
UHIO.UU

,,~u

IIU n.

.....

u~.

P• • tUIIO J: L

""""""

U HI. I1 IU IIUJo u t n , ltot.

90~.012 .

...1f3ttJ./U

.

~.:I""--t"'~~r

C',..

323

AERONAUTICS.

J.. 4. M
tRlRDT • C, • • POtTtL

1. • . " ~8ARDl..' O A.IOTTeR.
.

Ci-"OlntL
,.nIC . t!"ltLl' · V I, r.. ! •••

888,800.

988. 800.

~

,

,

I

' . ,
II

7

,.

"

/$

'''1~'fll''
,J~'''Nr_c~1'
C....c ..,.

Urfll ron
"' ".3 "'.., •
......

"'_r&c.

.v.......,.

Cu' U ' J<1,AtrTILC

...f'~~

./~

H1Q""

B.I. l'oDt,&Jil.
. 11TOlt nflDCt!.Q UD I1ttD 00'1111110 ""let ro l aAl tlal. D.

l,014,32S:nlcH'1J 1I1n ~ u. I'\ II". HII"" UI ';:::~ 3m ' . 15112.

(:."

"

~~
t::

~~S,!'

.i?~
.........

/.:/.tJ,

If.

1. POOLt!A"l.

1IlJ n ol.t n OOQC'IIG!.WD " ttl), OOUUIJO atflct rol a u nOlfts.
' " U\' fI "

L014.328.

r l~U n l

"u..

" ~UU

'''''I,

I 'll

PllAD!ed JIA II,

11112.

AERON AUTICS.

324

II. 1. PODLESAK.
MIltUn PIODDmlQ dD I.m GOfEB5t1'a DUlOE tol 018 ElotJl3..

unlou,,_ rn.n .lfIt. I., uvr. unwn ,on II . 1111 .

1,014,328.

Pat.ent..i JIJl. 9. 1912.
• ..'U ......"11.

I NV[N TOR

~J-(P~

'\

325

AERONAUTICS.

(J.. .... . ,

E. BU.T1ElI.

£. BUTLER.

8TlllOOUJO 1i01'Oi.
,

JI •. U3.21t.

.....07.03 ..

nD.COllaON MOTO
R.

Pattnted. Xar. H, lMlO.

r. w.

PAUIiTtD OC'T. l1:UO~ •

B.l.OU.

OlRIURtTI:R rOR .stDROO.I.R80N

C.oom

aU.Ulntl.

[~Ol!lta.

,u tlO,Uln flU. "~t lO , IILL

"tUhtlolrl~lt"'t . IO, IH I

,.z

'1;061,830.

,

3

1

,,(,

~l:

.Fif':s'

1"-&.J.

l~

,

iP

.L'I-'

II
'd

326

AERONAUTICS.

Olass 9-{Jarburetors, proportioning flow, aspirating, multiple fixed
fuel inlets, single air inlet with regulating valve.-As the proportionality between air and fuel for every fixed fuel inlet in a fixed air
inlet is constant within some r ange of flow rates peculiar to the particular arrangement in question, one more or less obvious way of
avoiding the necessity for compensation beyond this range is to
limit the action to the r ange itself by providin~ a sufficient number
of such operating units-in short the multiple carburetor. Such
multiple carburetors have already been examined, but another sort or
series of multiple carburetors can be based on variable air inlets as
on fixed, and with some advantages. This class includes all those
having a series of fixed fuel inlets with any number of air inlets provided with air area regUlating valves. The common groups of arrangements constitute each a subclass, two of these bemg concerned
with a single air valve, opening of which brings the fuel jets successively into action, the standplpe associated with an air inlet valYe
another, the two jet, high and low speed or idling, and main, u ed
with air inlet val Yes, makes still another, and finally the tilting fuel
chamber, a last group.
A single example will serve to illustrate the general class, not
definitely belonging to the subclasses, that on page 329. (1,177,53,
Mar. 28, 1916, Roberts.) Here a series of three fuel inlets i placed
in a cylindri a1 pas age with ,alved partitions each side of each
jet, the valves being linked together, so the throttle for the first jet
is the air inlet for the second. "While each nozzle is located at the
same height above its float chamber level, each successive one is acted
on by a different .vacuum.

Subclass 9.1-Fuel inlets act progressively with opening of automatic air inlet regulating ·1'aZve.-From one point of view there would
be no difference between this and the case of one variable fuel inlet
or one multiported fixed fuel inlet associated with variable air inlet,
but there is a real difference, because here there is no fuel-regulating
val,e, and the several fnel inlets are not equivalent to a multiported
single inlet becau e all the orifices of the latter always work together,
whereas in the present case there are times when all are working and
other times when perhaps only one is in action.
Four fuel inlet are arranged on page 330 (1,006,130, Oct. 17,
1911, Riotte), to be just out of the path of a swing-gate automatic
air valve across the air inlet, and are brought successively into action
by the air-val,e movements; those nozzles lying inside its edge discharge fuel, those outside do not. A series of 10 fuel inlets is provided on paO'e 330 and 331. (1,011,960, Dec. 19, 1911, Ionides.)
These are arranged alonO' the top edge of a longitudinal slot cut in
a cylindrical casinO', which is traversed by a vacuum-controlled piston
valve. The length of slot exposed to air flow across it determines the
number of fuel inlets acted on by the air velocity head ,acuum inducing fuel flow. An almo t identical plan with a ,ariation of some
structural details is ,shown on pages 331 and 332. (1,119,076, Dec. 1,
1914, Freyl.) A group of four nozzle arranged radially around the
seat of an air valve at different heights is shown on page 332.
(1,130,474, Mar. 2, 1915, Brush.)

Subclass 9.~-Fuel inlets act prog?'essively with opening of throttlecontrolled air inlet regulatin.c; valve.-This subclass is similar to the

last except for the control of the air valve, which is here directly by

ARRON AUTICS.

327

the throttle or is itsel£ the throttle. As enO"ines may operate at a
considerable speed range for a given throttfe position, so does the
throttle seem to be an indirect means of total air and active fuel inlet
control, by no means as primary a variable as the vacuum that itself
is fixed by or fixes ft.ow. It would seem, therefore, that this class
contributes less to the solution of the problem of proportionate ft.ow
than the last, but as one is convertible into the other by well-known
means the cases of the class are worth study with that fact in view.
One fairly early case, considering the youth of the whole art, is
that on page 333 (858,437, July 2, 1907, Brooke), which illustrates
a cylindrical valve acting at the same time as air inlet and throttle
as it moves longitudinally and uncovers and exposes to the vacuum
of air ft.ow, three fuel inlets in succession.
e,en fuel inlets are successively brought into action by the cylindrical slide, serving as both
throttle and air valve in the arrangement on page 333. (881,279,
Mar. 10,1908, Allen.) Here the orifices are placed well in front of the
slide and fuel ft.ow is induced solely by air velocity head vacuum, so as
the air ft.ow does or does not sweep an orifice, that orifice discharges
fuel or does not, and the amount of discharge of anyone or all that
are exposed varies with the velocity of air past it, but, of course, not
necessarily in direct proportion. The iris form of air valle or throttle reappears once more on pages 333 and 33-:1: ( 81,800, Mar . 10, 1908,
Horstmann), this time the contin uall y enlarging circle of air entrance
exposes to the action of air ,elocity four fuel nozzles at different
distances from the center. Each in turn, they discharge under the air
velocity head vacuum inft.uence, the direction of air ft.ow being parallel to that of fuel flow instead of crosswise as in the last case.
Three fuel nozzles uncovered in succession by a cylindrical valve
ser,ing as throttle receive air partly from a fixed and partly from an
automatic inlet, which thus impose a vacuum due to entrance resistance in addition to the velocity head vacuum, but the former must
be kept low enough so that the nozzles screened by the valve do not
discharge. This is illustrated on page 33-:1:. (1,073,179, Sept. 16,
1913, Sprung.) 1-\.n interesting special form is shown on page 335
(1,0 9,524, Mar. 10, 1914, Barrett & Wilson), where a straight row
of fu el inlets in a rectangular air passage is swept by a rotating
throttle disk haying a rectangular hole, the angle between the long
axes of the two rectangles determines the area of air passage exposed '
and the length of the fuel nozzle line. A rotating barrel throttle with
two slots, one, straight sided and parallel, acting as throttle and the
other, inclined, acting to control the lengthened area of the air inlet
and the number of fuel inlets exposed, is shown on page 335.
(1,094,67-1:, Apr. 28, 1914, Miller & Adamson.) A later form provided with a second air Yalve of the S\\ing type, controlling the distribution of the air on the two sides of the line of fuel inlets, also
operated with the throttle and arranged with two ft.oat chambers to
use two fuels, the more volatile one acting only on the low-speed end
of the nozzle row for starting and the less volatile feeding all the
r est of the nozzles, is shown on pages 335 and 336. (1,183,221, May
16, 1916, Miller & Adamson.)
Subclass 9.3-Standpipe.-This subclass is similar to the standpipe
subclass already reviewed, except that the latter received its air
through fixed inlets, whereas in the present case the air enters
through r egulating air valves, which prevent the vacuum from in-

-

328

-

-

-

- -

------~-

AERONAUTICS.

creasing so much with the air flow increase, and thus permitting of
shorter standpipes. In the first case, on page 337 (1,130,700, Mar. 9,
1915, Bennett), air enters partly through a fixed and partly through
an automatic valved inlet to a series of fuel outlets at different
heights. Each of these is formed in a peculiar way, two thin metal
sheets, sector shaped, fastened together on the radial but free on the
circular edges, surround each fuel inlet, the circular edges pointing
up at different heights. Air flow presses these together as it passes
and the fuel discharges successively from the edges of the higher
ones as flow increases, always into high velocity air. A curious form
of this class is that on page 337 (1,147337, July 20, 1915, fuir),
provided with one nozzle fixed in position and se,eral others at
different levels in the body of an automatic air valve, gravity closed.
As the air valve lifts a series of fuel nozzles are brought into action
at different heights above the float level and in different vacuum positions; the fixed nozzle comes in only after the air valve has stopped
rising and the vacuum still continues to increase; it therefore is a
sort of high-speed supplementary jet.
Subclass 9.4-Tw o fu el inlets, one mailn and one idling.-Air
enters through a special s,,"ing form of automatic ,alve, on page 338
(825,499, July 10, 1906, Sturtevant & Sturtevant) and fuel at the
constantly narrowest part of the air inlet, so its flow is due to air
velocity primarily. A separate fuel inlet is arranged in the throttle
for idling. A single damper valve acting both as air \'"ahe and
throttle is associated with two fuel inlets in front of it, on page 338
(1,016,108, Jan. 30, 1912, Steinbrenner), in such a way as to bring
only one into action when the throttle is closed, while both act at
more open positions if, of course, the veloci ty is high enough. A
different and later disposition of two fuel inlets with respect to a
damper valve, acting as throttle and air valve, whereby one only acts
at idling and both for wider open throttle position is shown on page
338. (1,147,940, July 27,1915, Griffin.)
Subclass 9.5-Tilting fuel charnlJer, radially disposed f~lel inlets.This is a sort of complement or inverse of the standpipe, where on
increased air flow the resulting vacuum lifts the fuel to successively
higher orifices, while here the nozzles are successively depressed in
regions of the same or rising vacuum, but usually by the throttle or
air valve.
A closed float chamber supported so as to rotate on two pins and
lying wholly within the air passage is provided with a row of fuel
orifices at different heights with reference to a lateral plane, so that
they come successively within the sweeping action of the air current
entering between the float chamber body acting as air valve and the
casing, is the combination shown on page 339. (989,307, Apr. 11,
1911, Simmons.) Seven radial tubes at dIfferent angles on a constant
level chamber formed in a valve spindle rotate with the latter and
are brought into action by coming into the air stream successively
as the valve opens. At the same time their flow varies, because of
the changing liquid head, according to the arrangement on page 339.
(1,073,577, Sept. 30, 1913, Smith.)

329

AERONAUTICS.

~,l. RUEIIT!.

I : L lbmTi

'''nunl.

V'II(I I!' ~

1 ,177,~38.

eUI QUTlL

lUll III. II,nn.

Pa(tllt(!d

llu. 28,'19Ul '

. .. 111 ....... 111 • •

- ",hltll, •• !l1I1}''' '''''''' '

1,177,638,

r.tb6~,,~~,~~'

:NfJ.z.

'.Fif..:J.

g

z

'\ _ o
-.
16

1$'

,0

"

JI

1.-8
0
11-8.",
JU~
.... ~#d/UUW
--.

330

AERONAUTICS.

C e: II0Ht. DtC'~
.

.

•~ ~~~~°:.r.E;.'~;I~'!'"
,,,.....

.... UIT':f. ... ,.."n.IIIL

"rollU"

1,006,130.

"r\/G H I' IIIL U.cr l,hst,

Pate.a:tedOct. 17,lOU:

1,006,130.

• . o. IOIfIDts:-(.l.unnn.

1,011,960.

HH,.t,f'U',H'Nf

1.11 ....

ht60tlld Oct.17.liiIJ
)lIrrl .... w~

1. . 0. IOYfD'fi"

PaUDI«IDec. 19.191L

1,011,960.

Pal.eot04 Dee

I~.III IL

.tUn...... lu"

lia.1.

331

AERONAUTICS.

A.O.IOIt'IDta.

LO. IOIUDft
Od.OmD.

Un lt~ fl'. ,nn

16'.11. it"H.

I,Oll,960.

htlluted

me. 19, 1111 L

.JJ..ul .... I}U~

FirM.

.---'"
~L'

o
K

JI. 8. Filct.

H. B. rRtT.

('",,,,UTo.

GiUUmL
.t.huoul .. IlL'» U , . 11.. 1111.

1,1l9,076.

... rHI~UIU run ..

ht,.ellted Dec.1, lflt4.
l' IL~t""lll1'"

i: 11,1111.:

.l,1l9,076.

•

Patented Dec. 1, 1 81~
... n"l..... nJ~

332

AERONAUTICS.

t.".t att .

1 . • ,11DI8, ·

CU.,Utta.

Il.tU OamL

6l"U~'U,,'I'U,..,. II. IIU.

U,IJunn tiU' IIIU, lUi.

ht.etlted: Doo.l,llli
, 'nu~1.W ,:.

1.180.474.

"': ,. \'i1f,a.
c:nlowa..

.,rl.ic 4tl"'~J1'\I,I1U

l'1.1.eD~· JW.•~19 14.
• Inn ......" "

'ate.Dted: Xu. 2, 1' 1~
IIU~1""llJ'l

888

AlmONAUTICS.

tun TnT,.1I0{
A. 6. 1I00f.!".:

O'IIURt>n. •.
.. n~ lu ' t "

fl~

UL 1.L

P. !LL1~.,
e11101tTtI rO I IIITtlR&L coomlo" UOllftL
.rUt", ...

~

r l~u .n n.IOU

.

•
.?t77'j'A'~1'.:ro.

"' ~
ArToluvEYS
P!TtntD aU.L 10,

a. A. eOltTWU,"
ou.nun r D. JlllU .... L COW'DITIOH t"UIHta.

lt~ ••

It. 111,800.
C. . . OltfU

t o" BOUTIIAMH. PA.TEHTtD Y1L to, 110'

ro, INrUIf.L COll,OS1l0 1f '"0J/fD.
un'",I .. flU. n o 1. 100..

334

AERONAUTICS•

. .. "\.'00

.. .t.. IOIIt I" /fIf, HTtVTtl) )UL \0, \901.'

'I.. In,'Of).

uru.ul..

fI~U

a. ... aouTtu"". HTtJttD lUL \l; ""

ollhtuu r OIJIITUIU!. 00 "'0'11011 UOII'tI.

CU 'OlttU rollln'UUL CO WUsrlOlf tlfOIICtI.
...... II..

UHIUtlU&lLUU'. ' . " " .

•

J- "IOJO.

C.SUUo.

1,078,179.

CUIOJntL
• 'nl .. re .. 'ILu . .....

,,'t.

htaot,edStplU. 18IS

1,073,1'79.

"'.

PateatedSept.l~IVll
, " U1 _1.U" ..

.:Fb'"

,,8

4J

OUitrUTD.
u'LII. ntrrnn .... ... I.U.

"

~~
IQ

.6T

/~

~

.-

>--

~"tt>.'Ir.'CW..~~"C.~

., ~

f".a.(,fT......,
.

•

..........

~~

~-

~~

~~~~~~~-

335

AERONAUTICS.

a. L

lAnETT. l.

w.o.lnuca.

8.

~

MILLU .

r. iii.

~n o . tTt

P....... "'. I~ lilt,

1.089.024.

1.094,674.

,"~'" T'''

..

"u. n.n

"DUI1O ..

"."11.
htetltMApr. 2&.ltll

",,\I("'OV

8

Ntmy ANifla

F-.JIIJtA<loNU_

~S?,. ~

11 . J. . II I"LU .

II . .... MI\l U , , M AD SO N..
. AM

r. w ! nunOJ .
.

OOutLt

'~H

C", U' I1U •

...,0'\ 1<" ... " ,,,, oJ" ,"'"

UU L
unH rUIl ..... 11, 1'11.

1,094,674.

.........

l'a.toDtedJ.pr. 2I,UIlt.

1.183.221.

P.ttnfed lb),16, 191B.
~

"un--.u, ..

•

, . 1111 . .. 11 1 ... .

336

ABRON AUTICS.

R.

~.

MILLER & f . M. ADAMSON

OOUll[ rU[l CUIUR(1(R.
"" pC A,ro. "LU " f t , "I '

1,183,221.

I',,(.ntl'd
'1

•

)1,)"

Hl,1011:.

S~lITS-SNII'

1•

337

AERONAUTICS.

W, W. M • •
UI

1,130,700.

1,147,837.

A~<'<~
R:.'95.

t

JS

~

7P
U

J~

"2:0

2r
oM

2G

'J1

72805 o - S . Doc. 559, 64-2-- 22

U"'t"'!~~'~:('~~!:II'

III '

httmd~ iQ: ailllI.

338

AERONAUTICS.

PUtlfTtDlULt 10, l.tO&.
T..... T. J. &tDlttVUt.
C".UtTU rOJl, OU tIIQINtL
A" ~IU"'''

tiU. l i n •• HI&.

e.G,"m'.
( . tIUttUt ,
."",,,,•• "<I' " •.11. 10'.,
1.147.940.

W
.J. &TtJHUtlf1f!:Jt..

t.lucatua.

1.016,108.

1,147,940.

" t~lutl " 'IU' '''''

" ..

h1.autedJan.3Q.lIlJl ·

339

AERONAUTICS.

O. P. anu.olfl.

0. p. lI WYOIfL

o.aumn.

..UUh tl .. rlU ' . U . ... \lIL

hLellI.ed..Apr. II , IRll

989,307.

989, 307.

l'lt.eDtedApr. U, lOll.

SII!lTB.

C. P.IINK OI'IS.
~n~':'1itl

989,307.

Fig. /I

PateDtfd Apt, 11, J911.

nUI . . t 1I,1t"

ht.tnted. Sept. 3O.1VI&'

, . - - - - - - - - --

-

-

- - -

340

-

-

AERONAUTICS.

Class 10- Ca1'bu1'etO'l's, propo1,tioning flow, aspirating, multiple
fixed-fuel inlets and multiple variaJJZe-air inlets, valved for regulation.-The only difference between this and the other class of multiple fixed-fuel inlets with multiple yariable-air inlets is the sort of
air inlets, which in the former class were fixed, whereas in the present class they have at least one air -r egulating valve. Besides those
cases that clearly fall under one or more of the subclass definitions
there are some that do not, and these are grouped under the general
class.
In the first case, on page 343 (979,700, Dec. 27, 1910, Proehl), a semicircular ring of fuel inlets is arranged to be uncovered succe sively
by a rotating cylindrical sleeve, and thus subjected to a flow-inducing
vacuum of the air velocity, which is prevented from increasin$ as
much as it otherwise would by a secondary automatic valve. Incidentally, a semicircular throttle moves with the sleeve. Quite a different arrangement is shown on page 343 (1,099,547, June 9, 1914,
Gentle), which is practically a pair of carburetors in series. The
first, for a "olatile fuel, has a fixed air and fuel air inlet, and it discharges past a throttle to the second supplied with a less volatile fuel
and proyided with an automatic air \alve, having the fuel inlet
around its seat. When the engine becomes warm enough a thermostat closes the throttle of the fir t carburetor and at the same time
opens a pure-air inlet to the second. Another case of double carburetor operating alternately instead of in series is that on page 344
(1,163,39~, Dec. 1, 1915, C()lrbett). H ere the main carburetor has a
fixed primary and automatic secondary air inlet with single fixed
fuel inlet, but there is another with automatic air inlet lifting a fuel
valve in front of it somewhat similar to those of class 1. A cam permitting the opening of either the main automatic secondary or the
supplementary automatic air and fuel valves is linked to a special
throttle in the main primary air, so it is closed at the same time its
secondary air is. This is a sort of high and low speed double-carburetor arrangement, controlled by a separate hand-operated linkage,
independent of either the yacuum or the main throttle.
ubclass 10.1-1 ain fuel inlet with supplementary higllrspeed
11
jet.-A fixed primary air inlet of tapered form is fitted with a fuel
nozzle having two orifices at different levels and a side entrance automatic secondarv air "alve is pro,ided for each in the form shown
on page 345. (928,121, July 13, 1909, Goldberg.) At low-flow
rates only the lower fuel orifice is in action, by reason of the low
vacuum, and all the air enters by the fixed inlet. Increased flow and
vacuum cause successively the opening of the lower secondary air,
fuel discharge from the upper fuel onfice, and then the opening of
the upper secondary air valve. Two fixed jets arranged on opposite
sides of a throttle which controls both the relative and the absolute
flow through the two chambers is illustrated on pages 345 and .346.
(95 ,416, May 17, 1910, Cook.) The low-speed jet, so called because it
is in action when the other is not on a nearly clo ed throttle, has an
automatic air-inlet valve, while the high-speed jet is arranged in a
fixed primary air passage with an automatic secondary air inlet. At
all throttle positions except the nearly closed one both jets are in
action. A combination, in which the high-speed jet is brought into
action by the vacuum lift on the automatIC secondary air valve of the
low-speed jet, is shown on page 346. (993,770, May 30, 1911, Fritz.)

AERONAUTICS.

341

Another case of bringing in the high-speed jet by the throttle is shown
on page 346. (1,046,434, Dec. 10, 1912, Bollee.) Here an accelerating cup is added to the low-speed jet, which is fixed in a fixed-air
inlet, the cup emptying as the throttle is opened and before the
high-speed jet comes in. The high-speed jet has its own separate
tube with fixed primary and ball type of automatic secondary air
nlve. An unusual form of throttle controlling the action of the
high-speed jet is shown on pages 346 and 347. (1,078,349, Nov. 11,
1913, Hawxhurst & Nicolai.) This throttle stem carries first a small
poppet valve which opens wide the outlet from the low-speed jet in
its fixed air passage, then in succession a series of three concentric
poppets are opened in succession, admitting to the main mixing
chamber the delivery from the high-speed jet gradually, and at the
same time increasing the spring tension of the automatic secondary
air valve of the high-speed chamber.
Another case of two jets at different levels in one chamber is
shown on page 347 (1,099,293, June 9, 1914, Goldberg and Tillotson), the high-level high-speed jet being brought into action by the
opening of the secondary automatic air valve indirectly as it closes
an air flole from the atmosphere to the high-speed jet passage which
permits the vacuum to build up and the jet to work, as it could not
so long as this air hole was open. The same result could, of course,
be accomplished by a direct mechanical connection from the secondary air valve to a fuel valve at the high-speed jet or by the
vacuum alone. Succession by the velocity of the secondary air alone
is shown on page 347. (1,120,763, Dec. 15, 1914 Thomas.) The
high-speed jet is here located in the air throat in front of the automatic secondary ail' valve.
Subclass lO.g-Main fuel inlet with supplementary idling jet.The principal difference between t his and the previous subclass is
one of succession versus alternation. In the previous case the lowspeed jet continued to work after the high-speed jet came into action,
here a low-speed or idling jet gi,-es way to, or is replaced by the
high-speed jet, no matter what the mechanism of alternation may
be. In the case on page 348 (1,055,352, Mar. 11, 1913, Pembroke),
ft small fuel tube is carried from the float chamber to a point abm·e
the throttle and is in action only when the vacuum there is great
pnollgh to lift th e fuel, which it can not do at open throttle, because
the main carburetor proper is of the automatic air-valve class. The
same r esult is attained on pa~e 348 (1,104,560, July 21, 1914, Shoobridge & Gunstone), by drilling the walls and leading through
these holes both fuel air to the stem of the throttle, rotation of the
stem acting as a valve with reference to the holes in it and the walL
A different construction again is shown on pages 348 and 349.
(1,166,308, Dec. 28, 1915, Arquembourg.)
Subclass lO.3-lIfultiple carburetor, prog?'essive, by throttle, with
individual automatic ai?' inlet regulating valves..L...-This is the subclass of multicarburetors with automatic air yahes ,yith throttle control of succession, and as arranged on page 350 (871,741, Nov. 19,
1907, Sturtevant & Sturtevant), there are two units connected to
a three-ported throttle by means of which either the large or the
small one, or both, may be brought into action. Five carburetors,
each with fixed fuel inlet and swing type automatic air inlets, are
brought in successively by the rotation of a cylindri cal sleeve throttle

342

AERONAUTICS.

on pages 350 and 351. (881,516, Mar. 10, 1908, Krebs.) Rotation
of a large barrel throttle brings in four units on pages 351 and 352
(891,219, June 16, 1908, Menns), but here there is added at the end
of the throttle a common automatic secondary air valve. Three
units arranged radially in a taper air passage with three radial
partitions are controlled by a rotating throttle disk; each one is
supplied with primary and secondary air, both vacuum controlled
in the form, page 352. (1,001,950, Aug. 29, 1911, Hart.) A pair of
plain secondary air-valve carburetors are arranged side by side,
using one float chamber and each with its own throttle, on page 353
(1,152,031, Aug. 31, 1915, Lobdell), but the throttles are so linked
together as to bring about the action of each in succession.
Subclass lO.4-lJfultiple carburetor, pro[!1'essive by vacuum, with
individual a:utomatw ai1' inlet regulating V"al'oes.-Just as with single
carburetors va.cuum control of any regulating valve in a carburetor
intended for general service, including variable speed engines, is
more logical than thl'Ottle control, so here in the control of succession of multiple carburetors the same should be true. This being
the case, the present subclass is of greater interest than the preceding
one though any good features of one could be worked into the other
by a designer. If an automatic air-valve carburetor worked as a se1£compensating device then there would secm to be no need for multiple carburetors of this class and there are not many. One of these
is sho1\n on page 35-:1: (1,040,414, Oct. 8, 1912, Rettig), where three
automatic air-valve carburetors are arranged around one float chamber, each air valve not only regulating the fuel flow vacuum of its
own chamber but also opening the discharge from it. The vacuum at
the outlet thus becomes the main lifting factor in the air-valve movement instead of the air flow between it and the fuel nozzle. .Another
of this class is shown on page 354 (1,108,2-:1:5, Aug. 25, 1914, SchebleI') with one main fuel jet in a' fixed air passage and automatic
seconda.ry air, but ha.ving in addition five high leyel high-speed jets
brought in when the vacuum lifts the several cOITesponding air
valves.
Subclass 10.5- tandl)ipes.-On page 355 (961,481, June 14, 1910,
Carter) is shown a fuel standpipe in a fixed primary air inlet to
which is also attached a secondary ail' valve, thus providing a double
compensat.ion. .An increase in the size of the priroa·ry air inlet and
a. tapered form for it surrounding the standpipe is shown on page
355 (1,010,116, Nov. 2'8, 1911, Carter), to which is also added a low
speed or idling lifting tube and a lowest level separate jet in action
all the time. The secondary auton1.;l.t.ic swing-type air valve is retained. Anotheor farm of standpipe with one flxe'd and one automatic air inlet is shown on page 356 (1,133,527, Mar. 30, 1915, Bennett), which has some other interesting fea.tures to adapt it to heavy
fuels. One is. a water inlet beyand th,e fuel, and the other is an exhaust-heated jacket for the float-eh.amber howl :1nd the interior of
the liquid standpipe.
Subclass lO.16-Jfixed flow .-Two fuel inlets arranged on opposite sides of a. cylindrical air passage fitted with a single air valve
are provided with mixed flow compensation on page 357. (1,168,513,
Jan. 18, 1916, Kingston.) Each fuel inlet has the accelerating cup
Emlargement of its mixed flow air passage, previousiy noted in several obher cases. The air or throttle valve is thick and more or less

343

AERONAUTICS.

£. J.

t. J.1'lQtB L.

PlOt!l1..

'C!U I0ImL
it,u ...n ..

w. v.
I1nJUTI.'

1.099.547.

OIn. II. Iflt.

w. ... DeNTL&.

OUTLe.
' l~n. " 'f. IfU

tl~U

Patented JQJle 9. HIl4.

Patented June 9, Ult",lInd_tlU1 ..

~---------------------- ----

- -

344

AERONAUTICS.

c.A. count,
utu~nlt.

_

IQTM •• • Itu.a. .... ,,'-

PateD&(a Df» .7, DI&'

1,166.393,

I ...,n-..ntl.

( . A.( onul.

( • .\.(0 .. [11.
1i','\ IV"""'If, ••. f . t l l ,

1.163.393;

r.ttnlecl Deo.1.191&
I I ... I ......UTI·

1,163,393.

~ e""""Ut.~

-.

., ~~

hceoud .Dee.7. rv-.
. ''' '' ...... 11 1 ..

"L""=- 3

345

AERONAUTICS.

l . .. GOLD l tJO.

l . " DOttllt!G.

.""""""

~ll l tl nUII"',l'. l_

911'3,1111.

/.J
W~eB

Jf,."

~
~,~~ I

~/(jJ.~

....

. 0 , E. OOOL

'IT

O. E, OOOL

,."..

UnJU""

__ I~~

(,1Itf-..

IIW , ... II, 1-.

i.nu ...

9G8,4i6.

968,476.

JII'fEIITtm

c-ry.. Z

.CHAI

"~
~U"

'''''''''''
,fIIlU.'.""._

Palant.ed K&y17,.Olo. .

346

AERONAUTICS.

G.

E.· COOt~

l .L.PlITS.

hteDw ....Ji1.tIIQ.

968,476,

IlU.n-ouna.

L.IJOLLft.

1. 1, UWt.BOUT.

OiIiOUTD.

CllUDltnlG

tlHIOU'UlIl.nua,., . _

Pa&clWllrea.10. lUl

1;.

r

MIOO L'-1

DIn""

UUIUfltrflLU'1.t1. n,11I1

1,078,349,

1'1.tellte4 No., 1l,181l

347

AERONAUTICS,

I . I . OOLD)J;lO " B. O TILtOTIDJ.
.

' . 1. U,,[BiJAlf .. E. r . lUCOLU

1,078,349.

ouaoU"/'U.

Patented NOY. ll , 1911

I . T. T8 01lU1.
1;1unrrCL •
• "uUlItlJII.U .ei, n . un.'

1,190,763,

348

AERONAUTICS.

O I, lJWIIOn.
.
olUO'~
..,nJtlo"",up ......

... I . MOOlllDa!!. i.

Na,W J\\ljll. Jtl~ •
I"*"~ "

IIU••

NeW JW. 110 III&.

r. Oltknoll't.
tatOcrw. JIl1Jl, lll4.

(. ". A.omi'oul"

1,166,308.

wn.tu.,
unlC.',., ""1 "" . " . "'"

P..ten~ Deo.28.19a.'
' .. ............. . 111'.

Fig:1.

349

AERONAUTICS.

(.

( . ' .,uoot/rUOUkQ,

H.A~OUhnotJ RG .
C~ IIUI(TI"

"'I~' "" '14/1 , .. fI, ,",,

1,166,308.

hUl1tfdDee.28, 191So

1,166.308.

Pltentedoec.28.J9,fl

,.oU· ....,·I" ...

I .. CH .....IOI U,.

Fig.3.

350

Jt..

AERONAUTICS.

m,w

uniTt» JlOY,
t . 1... t . J. nulTn .... t .
OOO'I.I IIUlllatTCR rOI ttrL031VC CIIOIR&8.
•

H nJfU,U r n .. .

u. no'

'I., tn,Hl

, ,,~

lI,.Ill,n "

o: uu•.

•• ~, •• ·'U. ...., I ... II.,.

UnNTtp IU.LID. 1101

OUIOICTtI.
H HI04TI .. 'IU ••u r l .....,.

!5

PATtKTtD .Of, I' . "01.

L."

f,
J . I. ITOlTtfUl .
'»011111.1: CUIOlnCR rot tll'LOSfft tNOIIfCl.

~ .. h .I"1

' •• IIUIt.

0. 1'1£8'.

UTtJlTtD Y"1.10. Ito..

O.lUOlrrCl.
\U~\h"U IIU. U ' . II. " ".

"'V(.IITOII'I

rles\reDS

.

~

•n~ .

r -- - - - - -- -- -- - - -- -- -- -- - - -- - - -- - - - ------ - - - -

351

AERONAUTICS.

llTtm D )In: I O, ltOa.

r t. ur,U1.

• "Tu n D lUL 10, ltOl.

O.I1UI.
OUIB RtTtI •
.." U H f'"

II ~U

H I , II, lin .

"'Un-·,,U'"

30

30

6

' •. m,n l.

a. ntll.

PlTOITtD lUI. 10, lto..

OUBtllI&T&
I.

~ir55

47' ~

1llflJ
wml(SS(s:

\~.

i .. ih.21"

• . W. WCNN •. - 'AUiT
tD

OJ .IDu n A.
u n l on l " ' It.n U I . • , lin.

lIUltlf,liOt;.

352

r .. Ut.2U.

AERONAUTICS.

• . " . YEns. un ••~ nnrt 1&, Uot.
CUIOltTtI.
run u .... u.,..

, .. Ifl,n ••

• • fl. ytJillf&.

rUtlfTtlllU'WE11. UOe;:

OU8UltfCII.

UUIf U III

T. I , aAlf.
T. I.BUT.
1.00l.9~O.

Pateoted Aut 20. 181l
IIIUT'-Ui:nt..

"OOl.9~O.

AD«~i9.·JllL
.IUIt·.....U1L

hteot«!.

~,.J,

Q"
'

'I.'

853

AERONAUTICS.

I. S. LOBDElL.
CAR8URtn • •
A,n. lCATlOI flU~ 'U . ' . ltlS .

Patented Aug. 31, 1915.

1,152,031.

FigJ

J

/

W!T~~~S(S:

~

..:/~
c.7!;. ~

72805 °-So Doc. 559, 04-2- - 23

354

AERONAUTICS

o. W.

SClltflLU.

uunrtO-

.." UfaIIH'I .."

U', I Io' OI.

1,108,245.

a....... ~

cF~oryl*./I('SrA~~/~~

~~.;;,.. ~

ou.-:. . .
O. p. ltTrIO.

a. t.ltt110.

CUlQlt'ttl..

c:.t.1I 0ltTPo.
.,nlhtlOl UlI.•

1,040,414.

,t"

"'~'Ulll1 'I~ • •
' . UII.

PWIlt.edOcc..8,UII%.

1.040,414.

%t_"" ....

.a.w...w.~

J(4.~

"n

' . lOl t

AERONAUTICS.

w C. CUTtl.
.

355

\'f. 0; (rU

TtR.

' .... VlrTtL

u)UtH l.l r fI~u.1I

961.481.

n. u ....

Pal.6ntedJlllle 14. IRIO

" 1\,, ....... , .

fig.6.
Invenror'

William C. Gar"r

bv ~ ~Alh"

•. C.CUTtL
IInln,no.
.." ::hftU ,au V LU, lfI ..

1,010.116.

" . O CUTtI.
.

ht&lt.ed NoY. U, ltll

1.010.116.

;:--- - - - - - -- -

--

-

-

-

-

- -- - -

-

- - --

-

-

AERONAUTICS.

356

A. a. BENNEtT.
(lAIBOBETEB.
UPLI OlT IOI FILED . ~,. tt, 1IIl,

1,133,527.

.

~
,13

21

l'atent.ed. !6r. 30, 1916.

8

- - - - - - - - -- -.- - -- - - - - - -- - - - - -- - -- - - - - - -- -

- -

-

-

--

-

-

-

357

AERONAUTICS.

6. ,UNGSTbN.

1.16Mla.

G, IlINCSTO
N.

6.

h ..uulu.

~ INGS ' O N.

....OU'lO · , .. . · ' · .. ',1I11.

1.16MI3.

-

1.168.6 13.

!&..e.

/foj1.f.

~

.tJ

14

rl

•
H

..§.d.

14

19

/r
1.1
/5 _

. 'II'

/I .
14
16

-

-- -

-- -

358

AER ONAUTICS.

ellipsoidal, so that when closed it fills the passage completely shutting off one fuel inlet but allowing the other to act for idling by a
notch opening.
Class 11-0arbu1'etors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single 0'1'
multiple fuel inlets with 1'egulating valves, smgle or multiple fixed
air inlets.-All the classes and subclasses so far examined had fuel
inlets, the area of which did not vary with flow, all changes of fuel
flow were necessarily the result of corresponding changes in the vacuum due to the air flow, and any departure from constancy of proportion remained uncorrected, or some compensation by suitable control of the air-flow area or the fuel head was introduced. The remaining classes and subciasses, beginning with this one, are all characterized
by regulating fuel valves, however actuated or associated with air
inlets, fixed or valved for regulation. This class itself includes all
cases of r egulating fuel valves used in conjunction with fixed-air
passages. It is clearly possible to secure proportionality or proper
compensation by varying the fuel -inlet area, increasing it where the
flow is insufficient due .to a low air vacuum, and decreasing it otherwise, but, as in other cases, the real problem is one of degree, because
the area adjustment must be just right in amount. Moreover, the
fuel-inlet area is always extremely small in proportion to that for
the air, and especially so in carburetors where a very high yacuum
is used to induce flow, so that any fuel-inlet adjustment must be
extremely precise and fine in comparison with an equivalent air-area
adjustment.
The cases of this class are grouped under several subclasses and
will be examined under their several group headings.
Subclass 1l.1-Single fuel-inlet valve, th1'ottle control.-On page
359 (727,972, May 12, 1903, Kingston) rotation of the barrel-throttle
lifts the fuel-necdle valve by rotating it in its fixed screw-threaded
casing. No direct reliance is placed on vacuum control of proportionality, but the idea is that proportionality of flow should follow
proportionality of areas provided for fuel and air or mixture flow,
respectively, which, of course, is not feasible at all for variable speed
engines and questionable eyen for those of constant speed. The
same idea is invoh-ed in the form on page 359 (873,392, Dec. 10,
1907, Stoker), where the fuel-needle valve is lifted by a link from the
throttle as the latter opens, and on page 359 ' (1,055,042 Mar. 4, 1913,
Higgi:ns), which has an iris throttle and an adjustable fulcrum-needle
valve:lifting lever. A rotating fuel valve regUlating three fuel inlets,
equivalent to one, by a throttle linkage is shown on page 359
(1,120,183, Dec. 8, 1914, Duff), and having as well a throttlecontrolled secondary air inlet. Another form that merely illustrates
t he cam idea of securing any desired numerical relation between the
fuel area and that for air or mixture flow is shown on page 360
(1,124,697, Jan. 12, 1915, Carter).
Subclass 11$-Single f uel imet, independently controlled by air
flow or vacuum.-One fairly old case, that on page 361 (725,741,
Apr. 21, 1903, Miller), indicates an appreciation of the desirability
of regulating the fuel flow by adjusting its area to some prime variable of air flow . In this case air volume and velocity constitute the
variable to actuate a fan-blade tY]?e of air motor, which in turn rot ates a flyball g overnor, and t his ill lifting opens the fuel needle, a

359

AERONAUTICS.

PlTtNm DCa. 1&, liaT.

1 •. 131.111.

A. &'ITOn8.

O.IIMalrON.
O.&8JD'RtTtI rOB OUOLtlft CHOIK&!.
.,UI OUIU

TI~U

OAIIOlt1£11;,
"rLI OITI"II~UI' U " .I"'.

H T I, 'HI.

fYttncsses'

({4~

bI....."f'o'r,

Alberl E stolte,

.2ly -;P§,£~

R A, Durt
.

W. R. O. HIOOINS,h.

UlIUCTtL

OUlDltTtL

ur uurcu

'IU '

& • .,,,.

... "~!fUI" r'~"."" 1O"

lilt.

PateotH Mar. 4,19Il

~~~~~jfJ";TS

1. 1 SlO'.C1=B3::;:==:;:::1
.

"

P
aUtiIA!cl Dee. 8. 1914.

- ------ -- -- --------~-----.,~-----

360

AERONAUTICS.

W. C. CARTER.
mULl: VALVE O
PtBnUlQ MtO
BANIBIil FO O
R ABBIJRt'W.
J.rrLI OU'I Oll fl1.t IJOC t . 2.Ull.

PateritM Jan. 12, 1915.

361

AERONAUTICS.

"TEI TtD

, .. 11$,1U.

in. 21, 1I0t.

. .. , ...u ..

0 . .... MUttl.
,n \.l~ H I" ' I~U

Q. LOlQtlt)UU.

UI.I, 1_

I .ITRO ....

1,066.603.

PJ.TtJTtD Dto• • • UU.-

r. •

OU ltIlma ro l n;:pLOU f't 1II0T0U.

,rtJtL n:tD BtotfL!TOI rol txrtolrn tJlOUI ta.

1. ITlOM.
U fuun u nl.U I " • •,

1.06M03.

1,1
"

362

AERONAUTICS.

110.771,098.

PATENTED SEPT. 27, 1904.
E. C. RICHARD.
CAlIBURE'rER FOR EXPLOSION EN GINES.
,"'''LJOUIO' r U.UI 1£'. 11. 1104.

U

WODJ:L

AERONAUTICS.

363

somewhat roundabout procedure rather full of mechanical difficulties. A more direct action is provided in the form on page 361
(746,119, Dec. 8, 1903, Longumare & Longumare), where the fuel
needle is lifted by a perforated flow disk raised by air velocity, the
lift of which can not be graduated properly without some more definite provisions than shown, in fact it is questionable whether this is
a regulating needle at all or merely a fuel stop or check valve of
class 1. A long tapered fuel needle is actuated by the vacuum beyond
the throttle or air valve, by a sort of bellows type of diaphragm, on
page 361. (1,065,503, June 24, 1913, Byron.) The fuel valve is
placed before the air Y:tln~ which acts as throttle, and a series of
mixing baffies are located beyond for mixing. The case is interesting
mainly as an example of direct ,acuum control of a fuel-needle
valve.
Subclass 11.3-jJ{ixed fiow .-One case only will serve to illustrate
mixed flow compensation, in connection with a regulating-fuel yalve
having the same object, that on page 362. (771,096, Sept. 27, 1904:,
Richard.) The fuel valye is a rotating plug, <Year connected to the
throttle, fuel from the float chamber and air :ft.om the main intake
are brought to a. common point, flowing together to the fuel nozzle
as the fuel yalve may permit a somewhat queer complexity.
Class l1J-Oarbu?'etors, proportioning flow, aspirating, single fuel
and ai?' inlets, both with 1'egulating valves.-In point of numbers
this is about the largest of the classes, indicating the popularity of
the idea of control of both quantity and proportionality by two
valves, one for fuel and the other for air, by their r espective areas.
As a class it is both old and new, the difference being in the means
of actuating the t,,·o yalves or in relating them to each other as will
appear in the subclasses, some of which are typically old, and others
mainly recent. In many cases the idea of flow-area control of quantities has led to a neglect of the equally potent influence of vacuum,
put in general such mistakes belong to the older cases though, of
course, some persist as inventors are not necessari ly well informed.
A few cases are grouped under the general headings because of
difficulty in meeting the subclass definitions ,,-ith precision, and one
of these is shown on page 370. (973,855, Oct. 25, 1910, Cannon.)
A rotating sleeve throttle for a fixed air passage moves a rotating
cap over an arc-shaped fuel slot to regulate the fuel valve with the
throttle, but auxiliary air is admitted through another throttle port,
after passing an automatic valve, controlled by the exhaust back
pressure or a pump delivery pressure, acting on a diaphragm.
Another such mixed case is that on page 370 (1,045,251, Nov. 26,
1912, Bourne), where the essential feature is a level tilting control
of a fuel-needle valve by a pendulum, as the body of the carburetor
changes level. On page 370 (1,061,995, May 20, 1913, Erickson),
the fuel and air valves are controlled together, partly by the vacuum
and partly by a centrifugal ball governor driven by an air motor in
the main stream. A power-driven shaft carries a fan and a centrifugal ball governor, the former controlling the air drawn through
an automatic valve, and the latter controlling the fuel needle, as
shown in the combination shown on page 371 (1,123,876, Jan. 5,
1915, Hiddleson), which is somewhat questionable as a proportioning flow carburetor, but suggestive.

364

AERONAUTICS.

Two ideas are illustrated in the costruction on page 371 (1,169,574,
Jan. 25, 1916, chulz), a r ecent case-first, the combination of t he
t hr ottle and the antomatic air-inlet valve carrying the fuel needle,
and, second, the formation of a series of more or less parallel thin
baffles to act as fuel lifters and sprayers. With reference to the
latter point, it is clear that some definite means of lifting the fuel
above the air valve and throttle from the fuel nozzle is necessary,
because the nozzle is located in a region of very low vacuum and low
air velocity. Here the baffles serve as inclined planes up which
the fuel is swept by the air flow concentrated between them and
moving at velocities that do not vary as much as in the main air
passage, because as air flow increases and the valve lifts, more of
these cross-flow passages come into action. While the proportionality characteristics of this air valve is free, the interference with its
lift by the cam acting on the stem to serve as throttle reduces the
case to one of throttle control with different proportionality char acteristics.
ubcZa88 HU-V cilved fuel inlet beyond ai1'-inlet valve acting as
th1'ottle, fuel valve controlled by air vrilve.- fechanically, thi.s is
a very simple combination, applicable to only constant-speed engines
with any hope of success, but not at all useful for ,ariable-speed engines, as the variations of Yacuum on the fuel inlet tend to upset and
interfere with area a ljustments. One of the early cases intended for
stationary engines is that on page 372. (623,568, Apr. 25, 1 99,
Secor.) This has two cocks, one for fuel and one for air, cOlltrolled
by the go,'ernor and linked together. A rotating slide air valve
linked to a lifting fuel needle produces similar results, as shown on
page 372. (654,894, July 31, 1900, Ha brouck.) A rotating screwthreaded fuel needle linked to an air plug cock is shown on page
372 (695,060, Mar. 11, 1902, Krastin), and a screw-threaded rotating
air ,alve carrying a fuel needle valve, both moving together toward
or away from their respective seats fixed in the casing, is shown on
page 372 (711,902, Oct. 21, 1902, Leppo & Leppo) . A rotating
cylindrical sleeve form of air valve carrying a fuel needle threaded
into a fixed seat is the mechanism on page 373. (745,063, Nov. 24,
1903, Jenness.) Two long taper valves, one for air and the other
for fuel, fa tened together and moved mechanically as one, constitute
the form on page 373. (791,810, June 6, 1905, Orr.) A screwthreaded fuel valve geared to a rotating air slide is shown on page
373. (816,477, Mar. 27, 1906, Kellogg.) A tapering arc slot form
of fuel valve on a rotating spindle has a cam connection to a swing
type of air valve, in the form shown on page 374. (909,490, Jan.
12, 1909, We taway.) The iris air valve linked to a threade I fuel
needle is shown on page 374. (926,039 June 221 1909, Warren.)
Adaptability of the fuel valve linked to an all' valve in front of
it, to the two-cycle engine transfer port is shown on page 374.
(1,013,955, Jan. 9, 1912, Roberts.) In this case the air valve is of
the curved swing-check form, and the fuel inlet is located in a bend
so that the passing air always sweeps the fuel nozzle. This arrangement, like many others illustrated, keeps the crank case free of mixture, a matter of very considerable importance with the less volatile
fuels. A long tapered fuel needle carried in the stem of an air
poppet valve, flat seated, both moving mechanically as one, is shown

-

---

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

365

A.ERONAUTICS.

on page 375. (1,028,723, June 4, 1912, Hezinger.) Another form
of the longer tapered fuel needle carried by a flat-seated air valve but
of different shape is shown on page 375. (1,0 6,594, Feb. 10, 1914,
Goldberg. ) Still another such fuel valve, but associated with a
tapered air valve, is shown on pages 375 and 376. (1,145,824, July 6,
1915, Udale.) A cam connection of fuel needle to a barrel air valve
is shown on page 376. (1,172,595, Feb. 22, 1916, H eath & Taylor.)
The present-day tendency to seek fuel passages ha\ing definite
regular flow lalVs to be associated with structures giving similarly
definite relations between flow and vacuum is again illustrated in the
following case of another form of capillary fuel-flow passage, the
outlet from which is controlled by a fuel valve moving with the air
valve. On pages 376 and 377 (1,190,124, July 4, 1916, Lukacsevics &
Terrill) a fibrous pad is inserted in the ports of the annular fuel
passage, resisting the fuel flow under the influence of the vacuum so
that it follows the capillary law with respect to pressure, the exposed
fuel-flow ar:ea varies with the air-flow area by the movement of a pair
of sleeve valves.
Subclass 1~.~--V oJ/oed fu el inlet between cdr inlet valve aM
tlwottle, both, fu el and air valves conwolled by tl~e tkrottle.--The
location of the fuel inlet, typical of this class, between the air valve
and the throttle represents a conscious effort to control the vacuum
at the fuel valve as it could not be controlled in the last subclass but
the linkage of both the air and the fuel valve to the throttle, while
giving somewhat better control, is poorly adapted to variable-speed
engines though quite a satisfactory and much-used arrangement with
stationary engines.
A rotating cylindrical barrel with two opposite ports, one for air
and the other serving as throttle with the fuel inlet in its body and
a threaded fuel valve actuated by the same movementL is one very
simple form of this type and is shown on page 378. ('(95,357, July
25, 1905, Maxwell.) Two poppets, one air and one throttle, with a
fuel needle valve between, are all operated together by cams on page
378. (805,979, Nov. 28, 1905, Menges.) The combination of a damper throttle with a cam-actuated fuel needle and a rotating flat air
valve is shown on pages 37 and 379. (848,425, Mar. 26, 1907, Anderson.) Another case of sleeve barrel, acting as air valve and throttle
on opposite edges, is shown on pao-e 379 (883,740, Apr. 7, 1908,
Poppe) with a slide form of fuel vaive in the center. Two damper
val ves and a threaded fuel needle between them are shown linked
together on page 379. (910,326, Jan. 19, 1909, Stevenson.) An old
form of annular tapered air valve linked to a damper throttle and
carrying a fuel needle actuating cam, is shown on page 379. (983,247,
Jan. 31, 1911, Miller.) A series of three linked dampers with a camactuated fuel needle is shown on page 3
(1,011,696, Dec. 12, 1911,
Winton) with a by-pass air and fuel passa&e leading to a point between the second and third dampers as an idling yet. Two dampers
on the same spindle with the fuel inlet in a return bend, its valve
being cam connected to the air and throttle spindle, is shown in
1,033,886, July 30, 1912, Gentle.
A piston sliding in a cylindrical passage with side ports acts as
both air valve and throttle, and moving on a ported hollow rod which
is the fuel-supply passage, successively opening a series of holes to

°

366

AERONAUTICS.

increase the fuel area is illustrated on pages 380 and 381. ( 1 ,080,~ 1 5,
Dec. 9, 1913, Everest.) A rotating cylindrical sleeve acting as air
valve and thr ottle is shown on page 381. (1,085,003, Jan. 20, 1914,
Austin), carrying a fuel valve cam on one edge formed by tapering
it. Another multiported fuel valve, this time with a helically slotted
sleeve linked to a pair of damper valves, is shown ~ on page 381.
(1,125,069, Jan. 19,1915, Coulter.) The combination of long tapered
fuel needle and tapered air throat, with the air valve, the needle, and
the throttle moving together is shown on pages 3 1 and 382. (1,143,511, June 15, 1915, Cox.) A later form of the plug valve serving as
both air valve and throttle with a fuel inlet in the middle is shown on
pages 382 and 383. (1,1 3,587, May 16, 1916, Parkin.) In this case
the fuel has the sliding sleeve form, is cam operated, and a separate
idling jet is provided, leading directly from the float chamber. It is
interesting to compare this with the early case on page 378 (795,357,
Maxwell) .
Subolass 1~.3, valved fuel inlet at or in fr011.t of air valve aoting
as throttle, fu el valve oontrolled by ai1' vatve.- When the fuel inlet
is in front of the air valve or just in line it receives none of the
vacuum due to air entrance which is so high when the valve is closed,
and which makes fuel regUlation so difficult. Located thus, the fuel
flow is induced wholly by the velocity head vacuum of the air or substantially so, and the addition of a fuel valYe giyes wider scope in
location and compensation, though it is clear that there is no essential
relation between the two areas, air and fuel, when the speed is variable. On page 384 (930,724, Aug. 10, 1909, Boore) rotating slotted
cone acts as air valve, and its movement also actuated the fuel valve
which is in front and receives only the vacuum of air flow before entnmce. One odd form is that on page 3 5 (977,044, Nov. 29, 1910,
Rebourg) , where a warped surface constitutes a variable tapered
throat at the small diameter of which the fuel inlet is located. T he
fuel valve of sleeve type is actuated by the same movement as varies
the air throat. A fuel needle valve is attached to an air slide on
page 385 (1,053,136, Feb. 11, 1913, Daellenbach), and operated with
the throttle, but it is not clear how this can have any influence. A
recent form, that on pages 385 and 3 6 (1,184,923, May 30, 1916,
Carter) , provides a cam connection between the fuel needle and a
damper, but adds, what is characteristic of the later days of heavy
fuel, a low-speed lifting tube for the main jet above the throttle.
Subolass 1~..~- Valved fuel inlet between automatic air inlet valve
and throttle/ fuel val"!e contr~lled by throttle.-Air a~ission th:-ough
an automatIc valve IS the dIrect me:ans of preventmg much rIse of
vacuum beyond it as air flow increases, and if gravity loaded the
rise may be regarded as practically nothing, though, of course, variably
loaded yalves with springs may be made to build up vacuum to any
de ired degree. Association of a fuel nlve with an automatic air
inlet is a logical thinO" especially so if the valve is of the sort that
limits the vacuum change to a small value, because in this case the
vacuum will not increase enough with air flow to produce a sufficient
fuel flow, so an increase of fuel-flow area is the n atural and proper
correction. It is not, however, at all logical to associate this fuelvalve movement and flow-area increase with the throttle, because
throttle position does not determine flow rate any more than speed in
general practice, though, of course, there is a closer, indirect relation

-

-

- - - - - --

-------- -- -

AEROFAUTIOS.

_. -

-

367

for the constant-speed class of engine. This being the case, one would
expect the carburetors of this class to be designed ' for constant-speed
engines only, yet such is not the case.
In the form shown on page 387 (755,074, Mar. 22, 1904, Sturtevant
& Sturtevant) air enters through an automatic spring-loaded valve,
and the fuel needle is linked to the throttle. A separate fuel and air
inlet for idling by-passes the throttle. An illustration of the stationary-engine adoption of this sort of arrangement is given on page 387
(947,633, Jan. 25,1910, Brady), where an ordinary fly-ball governing
throttle on the mixture-inlet pipe has also a connection to the fuel
valve, so throttle and fuel valve vary together, air entering the mixing
chamber through an automatic air-check valve. This case also illustrates the heating of such a mixing chamber by .exhaust gases to
promote vaporization, which when carried out to the necessary degree
becomes a means of conversion of a gasoline into a heavier oil engine.
A direct cam connection between a damper throttle and the fuel
needle is shown on page 388 (961,590, June 14, 1910, England), with
an automatic air inlet. Another form involving double-swing type
of automatic air valves, and a sliding form of fuel valve formed by
a slot in a sleeve with sliding plunger operated from the throttle,
is shown on page 388. (1,066,608, July 8, 1913, Harris.) An arr angement of the air inlet to develop the maximum-velocity action at
the jet without flow-entrance resistance and its building up of vacuum
is shown on pages 388 and 389. (1,042,982 originally, reissued as
13,837, Dec. 1, 1914, Sliger.) Location of the fuel valve within the
stem of the throttle, associated with an automatic main air-inlet
valve, is illustrated on page 389. (1,132,314, Mar. 16,1915, Eiker.)
SubclasEr 1'2.5-valved ftl el inlet between automatic air-inlet valve
and throttle, fuel valve ('ont1'olled by automatic air valve.-As a
simple logical arrangement for securing not only the desired proportionality control but also the least entrance resistance and maximum density of mixture, nothing appeals so directly and strongly
as this. The large number of cases in the subclass is itself an indication that this fact is becoming appreciated, especially as so many
are comparatively recent, and there is e,ery evidence that this subclass will displace in interest and use the former popular subclass,
8.2, of fixed fuel and primary air with automatic secondary air.
IV-hile the general idea of actuating a fuel yahe by an automatic
air valve is very old, the germ being found in those cases of class 1
developed directly from the natural-gas mechanism of stationary
engines and first used TI'ith pressure fuel supplies. The appreciation
of requirements for suitable and proper gTaduation in the interest
of proportionality and least pressure drop is comparatively recent,
and its growth can be traced in the cases of this subclass fairly well.
The first case, that on pa,ge 390 (770,559, Sept. 20, 1904, Clay),
shows a spring loaded ail< check valve with the fuel valve in front
of it where the vacuum inducing fuel flow is very small, but the
mixture entering the air vah-e suffers a considerable and increasing
pressure drop. However, the long taper needle now generally called
a "metering pin" is clearly shown, and the valve seat has a small
angle taper showing an understanding of the relation between axial
movement and area and the necessity for considerable movement for
precise graduation. Many later forms fail in some of these points of

368

AER.ONA.UTICS.

construction. An indirect movement of a common form of fuel
needle through a cam by a spring-loaded automatic valve is shown
on page 390. (807,479, Dec. 19, 1905, Mason.) On page 390 (818,853,
Apr. 24, 1906, Renault) a form of sliding fuel valve is used,
but the automatic air valve is gr avity loaded as is proper for
the case, and, even though it has sharp edges with a low coefficient
of efflux, it is provided with a long slight taper seat, the good
effects of which are largely destroyed by th~ r estriction about the
sprayin~ cone. A return to the long fuel-metering pin and its
associatlOn with a gravity-loaded long-taper automatic air valve
is shown on page 391. (826,531, July 24, 1906, Briest.) A gravity
swing check actuating an ordinary needle is shown on page 393
(892,155, June 30, 1908, I-lodges), and a leyer-operated metering pin
linked to a spring-loaded automatic air valve on page 393 (926, 48,
July 6, 1909, Carlson) . Another form of swing air check, grayity
loaded, is shown on page 393 (895,709, Aug. 11, 1908, Abernethy &
Abernethy), this time associated with a rotating plug fuel vah'e,
that constitues the spindle of the air valve. A fuel valve consisting
of a pair of flat sector slides moving over a circular row of fuel
orifices is shown on page 393. (941,424, Nov. 30, 1909, Leonard.)
The fuel valve movement is produced by a helically twisted stem
of the spring loaded automatic air valve as it lifts. An annular
automatic air valve, spring loaded, is shown as lifting a very long
fuel-metering pin, at the lower end of which is a dash pot piston
in the fuel on page 394. (971,038, Sept. 27, 1910, Gulick.)
The problem of lifting the fuel in such low-velocity air streams as
are typical of this class is recognized on page 395 (984,874, Feb. 21,
1911, Winton), which places the f uel valve at a high point and operates it by a yoke from the stem of a E'pring-loaded air valve with a
liquid dashpot. This same lifting problem is attacked differently
on J?age 395 (995,623, June 20, 1911, Miller), which has the low-speed
liftmg tube above the throttle as found in other classes. Here the
automatic air valve is of the swing-check form and operates the fuel
valve by a <!am. A piston form of gravity-loaded automatic air
valve oarrying a fuel-metering pin on one side and having a separate
low-speed fixed jet, is shown on page 395. (1,006,411, Oct. 17, 1911,
s.cott.) A long-taper gravity-loaded air valve l'ising in a narrow seat
and guided by a fixed central spindle carries a tube at the lowest
point of its stem, into which projects a fixed tapered fuel pin, as
shown on pa~e 396. (1 ,010,003, Nov. 28, 1911, Stewart.) The lifting problem IS attacked by passing some air directly across the fuellifting tube to produce the necessary aspirating effect. The stem
itself contitutes a dashpot plunger. On pa~e 396 (1,032,307, July
9, 1912, Stewart) the metering pin is moved to the air-valve head
and the fuel is discharged through radial holes into the stream of
air, while on page 396 (1,049,417, J an,. 7, 1913, Stewart) the fuel
valve is located in a side pocke.t open to the atmosphere and is actuated f~om the air valve by a lever. From this pocket all the measured fuel and same atmospheric air that has not been measured by
the air valve are carried above the thuottle, being heated by the exh aust on the way. Of course, with a wide-open throttle and low
engine speeds there is no assurance that there would be sufficient
vacuum to lift fuel in this way as high as might be necessary.

AERONAUTICS.

369

A long met ering- pin fixed in a long-taper hollow air-valve stem,
gravity loaded, dlschar ger.: its fuel directly into the air-valve seat
where, of course, the velocity is greatest on pages 396 and 397.
(1,050,05'9, J an. 7, 1913, Gould.) An odd form of gravity-loaded
air valve, lifted indirectly by the vacuum, is shown on page 397
(1,088,231, Feb. 24, 1914, Lawrence), which carries the metering pin .
on its end directly in the air path. On page 397 (1,115,951, Nov. 3,
1914, Martin) the fuel inlet is in the form of a straight slot exposed
in varying degree by a piston form of automatic air val,e, spring
loaded. The metering pin itself is formed on the end of the airvalve stem on page 398 (1,120,128, Dec. 8, 1914, Browne) and lifts
by aspiration through the hollow portion of the stem above, dischargmg at the air-valve seat radially. An electrical fuel heater is
also provided.
Two automatic air valves, both spring loaded, join their air streams
and therefore act as one on page 398. (1,123,048, Dec. 29, 1914,
Washburn.) One of them lifts the fuel-metering pin and the fuel
escapes into the combined air stream at the entrance to a sort of choke
tube. A recent case, on pages 398 and 399 (1,130,350, Mar. 2, 1915,
Thompson), uses a gravity-loaded hollow piston with tapered entrance, in the center of which is fixed a tapered plug carrying the
fuel passage. The metering pin is in its top and lifts with the
piston through a cam, permltting the fuel to flow radially into the
high- velocity air. A pair of swing checks on opening lift the metering pin, so fuel is discharged directly in the path of the highvelocity air in the form shown on page 399. (1,143,779, June 22,
1915, Pembroke.)
An unusual form of heavy double air valve, gravity loaded, with a
central fixed meterin~pin and air valve seat discharge, is shown on
page 399 (1,145,172, July 6, 1915, Speed), also provlded with ballvah'ed dashpot. Another case of fixed cen tral coincal taper plug,
this time with a cylindrical sleeve valve lifting around it by the
action of the vacuum on a gravity loaded annular piston, is shown
on page 400. (1,149,291, Aug. 10, 1915, Richard). The metering
pin is given a peculiar curved form necessary for proportionality
with this form of air valve, instead of curving the air valYe itself
or its seat. A small idling air hole is pro" ded at a throttle slide.
d
An adjustably fixed metering pin, seated in a hole in the stem of a
gravity ioaded air valve, is shown on page 400 (1,159,029, Nov. 2,
1915, Hodges), the fuel lifting being accomplished at low speeds by
a fixed by-pass for aspirating air.
Direct lift of a multiorificed sleeve form of fuel valve, by the movement of a swing ail' check, directing the air aCross it, i~ illustrated
on pa{;e 400. (1,162,680: Nov. 30, 1915, Buick.) Incorporation of
the dashpot within the graVIty air valve, and the use 0 : mercury for
loading it, are illustrated on p age 401. (1,172,39 (, Ji'eb. 22, 1916,
Shulz.) These features are associated with a lever operated metering
pin at the side, discharging' at orifices around the :l.il' valve seat in
the path of the entering aIr. A case of indirect action is that on
page 401 (1,179,568, Apr. 18, 1916, Shortt), which has two diaphragms, one operating the air inlet, anl another valve in series with
it having fuel or ifices in its seat. A threaded needle valve is r otated
with the air inlet valve.
72805°--S.])oc.559,64-2----21

.

370

AERONAUTICS.

.....,......

t . r.IDo Ut

t.0. t ......or.
" "-"'uIIUrlu. .... .... ...

1173,866.

C.

1,061,996.

t\u~

.. nu.

U' U~'I I " r'U."

. el l. 1t1l

h teDted NoY.26. ltlL

1.046,261.

C.

r. ellenO"

r

tlHlilOK

PWllted llla120.llIll

1,061,996.

~
q&~.,,)

J1

(J

-.

1t;;;~

-

,(.: ..11'~~
__
IZ-R7~.

•

371

AERONAUTICS.

t . O.

( . r . 5("l.I12:.

~1.169.674.

U'f\".'It",,"IfI''''''''' ·'·'·'''',,··II'''

SlDDLt!5/f.

1,123,876.

PaJt'lIlJId JAD. 2.\ J9Jft

..
~ !r

~

r--'---'---.

~

~J. '

fC

L-,-,---l

..rzg;-4::

~~

;_

{"_~

......

r. Sc7JuZ:J.,

C. r . SCHllll.
( ... u_ntl,

aI"' ... '... .. WI' ...... .... .

1.1 69,074 .

. .". "IU I ""

372

AERONAUTICS.

-.

J. A. neol.
UPU,.U U"11
~--

...

'.tNt94'Afr. Z$......

-..... 711,102
J,

,,~ a.

- -.

0, • . U"O.

ullun,,' n. U'lUlyl """lL

....- ....

....

,
0

" .

•
,j'

.

J-'S;+·

.

.~ts5.060

ht..tel.".II,ItOZ:
A KRUll".
.

110.15 4."4

""'O"lurOI IlYDlDc . . . aIU"ltt.

'0A. "UUDUe!! .

H'UL.na. ' 01 ,.noun 01 Gun un 1:1" 1"

.;£/""@J
,~~~~~~

"""-

CAIW.A' A-....u.
~pn'<-

,.

s

•

\

\'

878

AERONAUTICS.

PUOi'ftD 101', n lto'.
p,J£nw..
, ClUtJltTtll FOR OUOLtit tlf011tL
,ultIUTI'.rnUlln. f.lln,

'.,nl.t77,

.. .. "l,UO
J,

r. oll.

O.&aJORtitL
An U OUIU "UI .,LU. U ..

,,,nll:tIl IUJ.,,.nw
O. W. ltLLOOO.
OUJ01&TCl,

' J TEJ.TtD XU. J1. UII"
0, W.ULt.OOO.

O'&UOltttL

&nUouu. nu. U l. L IfM

"",.IIUIOI

uu. ru. J, II....

~, Jl:H~.

.... ~ .If!~

........

t;..."K~ .

....

~ ~. .{,a4:...-

""-

374

: AERONAUTICS.

E F:"illtr.
:

............

", c. WUT.&.'''T.
UtU~ UI"

"UI

.n.... 1_

9Z6,OS9.

909,490.

'~

I~

" Fl9' f.

"
ft)
"'

I

.
~
JJ

-r.'

"" .

Fig.?

to F. "lIlt!.

L M IOIUlI.
.

~"'OUTD.

~ n\\'.lIn

926.039.

I\\U

~l.lIQ lttU.
.
.,UIUfl""U. &II, II, IU"

rnru. \tM~

htalted.1w!2.UOO.
, iUlf_..".

1 ,01 3,9 00.

Pateuted

,Ja.o.

8. Jut

375

AERONAUTICS.

ft . , 0. BUllOtt

l .. t.OOLDltM.

onann'"

IrrLIUtJUrl~u

CU'OltTtI.

. . tlt.lfli.

1,028,723.

.rruUt •• • t/LUUt, I, "

PateDted h ne 4.ll1l 2.

"I .

~:¥a~J

~ .~

S.M, IIDAlf,

J I . aOLDatlO,
cnlnlntL

CA"\lItIIi •

.,UIUf'I ' 'IU:''''. I, 110...

.,PlIt"l,. ".U """. III).

PattlltedP-. IO,IIiIJ;

l'osM94.

9
"II
t..Jstn.e.»eJ.'

7 8tk~·
::;;

1,14~,824.

376

AERONAUTICS.

I. II. ClDAlt.
(.&... ~.m

_

..

1. 1 4~.824.

CU.UI(IU.

r.~WJl..lr'19u..

' ... x .....

'''10 ..... .... u

' ..un..... 'u·

r "'HLAllI' W TAnOIt.
.O.
u.unttu.
'ntK..... "UI. ln, .. I ~'~

1 . 172.~9~.

, ... HUTH '" W O. llROL
.

OO'Itoo' ''(I'''C.,LUI I

C OllU
.
ltAcs(V,cs ,e,nlllll

AERONAUTICS.

1.190.124 .

~ ..u..

o

@

~6

,2dJ.

~

:2L

-.26

,26

.zm,q~
~

.<?.s-

O-..;w .-{)

. 6
.... --- -------. _-

.z'

377

378

AERO NAUTICS.

B. I . MU"ttJ..

U TElfTJ:'D l'1Jl,y 25 , 1I1l5.

r •. IOU 1, .

t . O. IIEHOtl;

(1 .. . . 0&&11. ...

P.lTEJftD JIIOVf tl,l"" ,

OAUtl lt1tl.

•"~" ' f1" nu.."" ,,, I1...

u n lO ll' l U

""t

nll, li, llOII,

..~':.:1 '
. ..
.0 .
II

'1· _.: 'I

o

.~

'0',""

u

A, O .. tN Ots,
.

"TU TID

(lU.IUlttTC!.
"'UhfJ"'JI~b"U. U. I~.

. ov. ft,

1'05.

'h-.n.Us.

•

&..

ANDERSO N.

PATERttD M.. 1t n, ltD' .

QUI13U'T tR r Oil OUOLtlft E~OJ)lE!.
H 'IIC&f IU', u • • n

r.

U . 11f1

I I I U f _ ""

..

379

AERONAUTICS.

UTUTED

1... ..',.,40.

xu. til;, ItO"

L. J.k DtUOM
.

Od,OatTEB

toa OUOLllHt

urU~ U IU

Po
I l'I n

, :'o,,£.

,,,mUD ill. " UOI.

OJ.lltllttlll.

j,tJ ~I'U I "' I \ U I"'. II, I'OI.

EJ Ol,EI.

'!loll " '.1" 10M.
11(Utt-4.UT . :

). A. MI LLE"

l.. M. aTEvt M .
SOli

OUlUInu.
' IHI IU ' , 101 1.

," ~IU'I "

983,247.

910,326.

-,,&2.

tNIfLVTOtl

.~dS£r' HSbnn~o".

~ ..,cz

'noM'"

~.

380

AERONAU TICS.

A. "'KTOlf.

uunnu..

1,011,696.

"'0..".. 'I~IJ.".I.

" WINTO"

c.. ..Onrn..

to\\

PalMlW Dec. 12.. IG IL

Hun " ... rlU' . " ". UI\

1.011,696.

J.,.".Ulltt.

1:. P. nUtst.

.,IUt.I,oteun.

~"~I ' . 'I"

1,033,86 6

Inn

"H~

CUJ~ltTU

UI'

1 1 080, 816.

1'0' ",UU LtIO II UHIO I [JOU'u.

UHI,""" !lUI . "

\I, ' " '

Pa.1e1l1«!

De.=. Q, I'IS.

c
FiG.~.

A~R~
fiG,s.

WtTNE"-SES

. :¥;!tn

Co

~_

6

V-A
Fi/G.4.

Fier.s.

[NVrNTOR.

~fJ.'..~

PEn~",""

381

AERONAUTICS.

lL.lUml.

t. ~. tvtltn.
euuatmrollllTtl.UOOVIerno. n orJtI.
.,n ,~.1Lt . riLl. no n. ,til - Patented Dee.~. UIIJ.

1,080,81-6..

FIGs.
K

0' 0' 0'. 0'

~
fo/J.

c

01!i3
WITNESSES

fiGS

_'lh«J3......t...::1.o~_

..-~. ~~--

INVENTOR

. ~- ~~

pe~Gi2'~
ATrORN~Y

lT~;V:'
~~;..-..J IJ .-;>~.

~~

R. M. COU LTtR.

1.l25,069.

A. CO .
lt
hI.eDt-'CI JAD; J 9, 1 9 1~

1,143,511,

l\tCAtedJUD8'15,1916.h.n ...... u' ..

.ur~:AI~~L ~r

~:E~,
~-

382

AERO N AU TICS.

A. 4;0)"

' A COX.
.

uu..,!! •.

(,... 101( 1'1 ' .
"'IIUltU

""u, tut.

t,u • •

..,hlun'.""' '''I.tto'·n..
1'ateal.ecUue J6.m~
. . . II ' ....... U · ...

Ii!! . !) I'

I'~f
p.J<:'l-

~ ·9-~-!!'

~;~~
-z.e.'~~L.O.s..:se~.

9&

~~e ..... ~D,..

t

~a'!'-7'-~' · C-..c;

.JW

A. COX.
Ct-UU 'IIU.
''', Kohl' " l i t " .. , . ..

. ....

h ',oted: JII.I&15, t9IA
. . . tU .... I·tlf~

1<9.10.

1. ,1 8 3 ;~87

•

F. 9 ·J/

i

;

•

--

...

/'
/,

--.-

Fitj.Q.
-+ --+

76

383

AERONAUTICS.

J. W. PAR~IN.
,uaURU£«.
~.'\lC"flO_

1,183,687.

'IUO OI C.II. 1114 .

Patented May 16, 1916.
lIMtlU-UUf'.

384

..... 1.01
1.

AERONAUTICS,

~.

fALlllrUGWttl.
UHOII"UII.L

"1"~

.,,"4,.oU.
J• .... LUlTYIIOWICl.

I~_""' '' '''u
(.1 • • • 101.)

"" .. . .J ')U.

oJ, 'UlUTV"DWltZ.

'.I..t" Ocl l.ttO!.

'--

O~ t.

',1101.

H. B. JlOOI&.

U'L0I1UUIIIIL
( • • • • j o!,)

'"uIl4

nH"I~'t"\IIt ..
~_"",,,.,,,,,,

....... ...'"
930,724 •.

Pataot.eclAIII· IO.III08.

385

AE RONAUTICS.

o. ... OAtI.LtMUOI.

),IEBOtJlQ:
OU)IntTb.
U nIUfltlJlLU . " . II, III"

l'atNlte4 N07,2$I, JII)Q.

977,044.

" , C.CAlfU.

u, a. DAtLLttl'l#-CH.

tlll 9"1I111.

""'1(.11•• 10111'" "."' 1
,

CllJglETtL
&
,.U CU I, . rnU/&', I I. 1111.

l,O ~ 3, 136 .

h~Dl.edr6b.J I , lGI :l
inn~ ,!,H~

72805°- 8. Doc. 55!), 64-2-- 25

1,184,923.

Ptttnlti1 )(lIj30,l!Jl6.
f

l~nIO-'.IIT"

386

AERONAUTICS.

W. C. /:ARTER.
CARlUII[T[It.
""UUf!OI fll(O " ", U, If l l ,

1,184,923.

r.lented M.y 30. 1916Z' "UU - SNUT 2.

387

AERONAUTICS.

r,... ..""r.

oolf'larn~. D Oor..
" ,u.uln 'I ~U j,JL II. II'"

rinul.l.

947,633.

- ... ,,,,2l;llrf
.lI ln··.... Qi~

r. 'If. Jun.

tnnru. OOI.lUTlOI aQl7\
unl on l " "~. UL II, 1_

947,633.

t , If. 'UDY.
1:nD• .u. OOn CITIO. D otn.

Pat&Wl&n.2&. 1111o.

..,tUUfln IHU~"

!" I_

Pa.teotedJan.2$,UIIo.
"IUU1II-nall "

fY.'
.F .4 .

i!i!

1/iJJ
210

20

'9

4

I~

388

AERONAUTICS.

S. I1t.m

... to tJat.UO.
".1l.ft Fell UUntTDlln OTID

CUJlIIUTP.

~U.UUl.

AltUhn..

UU.lfUI" nUl H . I f. It...
"

r~.n. If.U'"

1.066.808.

3J

c

IIc. .?

_l>lI t IOU. ,
II&U ~'"

29

•

IIc./
~TN£'$SE3

a~
~

ItyVENTOA
AltTffllll £.c:;n:l.ANO

2/'

0.,.- tfls ArrORNE)'
~

..;1..0

"""i:IUO U ,

"7j,8." .. t..

1,066;608.

htllcl.ell July

$. 1111

nliltloo4""'~

IHV'NTOA.

#t'

i.z(W~ ~UU1l.

~

•

389

AERON AUTICS.

L. I LIOta.
onlOlt'Tti.
Unl'.~IOJII1IIUl. II. III"

BoIIn64 Dec. I. 1111'-

13.887.
III ..... t-I!UU ..

.-',

INYCNTOA.

~_

~~D.sL~

.~
.

f. II. tIlE:!.

.4TTOAIiCY,

T. B tuta.
.
t.na.trca.
ru I , IIU '

UUlOUIf' ' .ILU

ratente4 JI&r. )5,19I)'
IU.'r......u' .. .

390

s .. 1"fo.,U..

AERONAUTICS,

£. I .

aLn.

'''~.n' 1m. 20.ltoi.
I.~.

O.uJUUTU rOI UPLOInt £lGIlta.

. ..

'U,I~l

UttNTtD.lPL
I..ICUOLT.
CAllo.tyn.
''''\UUI" rll,,''' ''tto. ....

AU", • •

o.uioiuCL

.' , ~.. uu.'",u""J".'tu.

I.IJ1.Ihll ...;lIua. u ..... ~

u,.itOt: ·

, .. • 1t..6J,.
1.. UIUULT.

C•• IOUTEL
ItUI'u,nlilU ' I f I.. t_

391

AERONAUTICS•

... ete .Ul~
J . t . M.. BRUST.

-h TtlfTi!Jl raLl. '" tot.
J. t. Y. JR l tal .
ell,Ultttt.

CUIUItTtL
UUI" fI"'I~" • ••I . II.

.,HlfUJ' , I ILU I U . II•.II"·

II""

Fig.l

,.~-rt.t~~,~~Lt
.

cl.>1'("...,_~e~

.,
........

/JT

~

~o.c~

AlfDIINU

PUt)'fTtD JtJJ.J " ~ , 100i'
I. £. Y. Ban:ST.
CAlrUlun.
UHIU11tf IIU"U'. II./"",

NlDKKCY

... U ,.I})

' lTt1JrtD

Jon , f,"1i6i.

J. t. ... BRltsT.
CnID1CTtl.
u nlUl'l1I

fl~I'

. ....

,l,

'N ......

F~.S.

~.',P!.~r;
Br
~ ".~-­

AIJOR1ID

392

AERONAUTICS.

'''H",'I .
~.

t . II. 1111:11'.

,uI$JUfltl

J.

n.

II. 1I1Ut .

OHIUltTEL

C.&lIlJ'ltTEL

r u. _.... 11: .....

J"~U""

1/U) . ' ,"11. " ...

';",4

~'J

... liuu

(u

r.

fr. 1(0DO&8. ·

OUBD'B&TEB.

uul ..n .. "u' .... ... .....

.,nIU~IU

.~

"
/f~

1\!:.t_tC'

O"Ol";;J...I(<<If~w'~

P'lTtS'T£I)Jl1IE SOtl'Oa.

P.lrtfl'TtD JULY 24, liO&.

I . C. II. 811&8T.
.oUIIII£1£1.

..Mt"'r-,.J.!:f:;:'""

'11~. UI~ ....

FlU. _0."1''''

393

AERONAUTICS.

llt: 115,701 .
, " Ut U 'U

n~u

U I 11. un.

U .nlttD lUO ~ ll . t t<ll.
t. 1 .• 0 , • . Utl Jl' tT!t.
U BJ'tIatTtl rot BTDlOC1UO! EJaI Kt S.
.,r ~I" f l "

926,6'8.

r.'

" HIO . fI U ' Itn U I II

O,Q... LtO)U.RD.

PATENteD .iUO. II . 1'01.

C,
O. H. ABU NtTBY.
OJ.lJORtttR r OR Bl DROCAIlBO H CN OINtS.
If~"

r n ... I U . II. " ...

941,4,24.

Pa~Dted

}{o'. 30, 100g

..r~r ·

(!,C.L;""ruvv.<-

~~-­
~"

394

AERONAUTICS.

...........

t . J.ClJt,rt£

t.J.Utf1lt.

iUUOlETU..

U"J,,1nrrn .. ,., ... _

UHllt n~ 1

971,038.

".o

I""

....,.......

t . I,

"""... e.,t.r7.1110
, •• Ut.... "., ..

z

it

OULT or .

£. 1.0 01.10(:
CUJfJU!U.

."uurt.rnu, 'U,-\_.

971,038.

nu • •

971.038.

" "1111 111')\11 " ' .. 1""

h&ct.d 8tpl21, I'IG.
Inuu·....,'1l

9'1l,03IJ•

hteDtId 8epl27, Ulel
'IUIr-HIIT"

395

AERONAUTICS.

wind)"
cnaouna.

t.

1.-"UITor";"
eUIUR1tL

~~U1I i l II'"

uIU .."urjJ.u ·u" .. LtWo-

u ...........

Pa1egted lal1.21,leJL

1164,674.

964,674.

.IunHUUI.

-w.lCon.

a.l. lillt.LtL
UlMInTlL
U",I,,'IU lJUI " ',

. \l9~,623.

«""

1,006,411.

396

AERONAUTICS,

..... c..Tn".. r.
."U.",•• 'IU' ,n I.U'"

............

1,010,003.

I..

0. nrwur..

'''''' -

1,032,307.

t U UUf U ' 'I U , "U; I,.·J ru..

h.uI:tted ,)'ulIP, I'lt.

hjzbu:.3"~"

""~r

~<"<A'ho.-'

&.

c.•Tt".4U

I . B. GOOLD

C'UlIU1tl.
HHlf.;l'r. , rlUO 'U, If. 1I1l.

1,049,417.

Palt.Dted Ju. 7, 1813.

1,060,069.

Feg ..!

'Pateotal J11l.7. 191"

397

AERONAUTICS.

11. R. UWltllCt.

1. r.oonb.

C4u~.m.

ciuuarnL

.''''''''J .. n ...~.u ........

W,

PI~lItM

net 7, 11l1S.

1,088,231.

hUtI~ Feb. 24. 1014.

W. t . WARTIJf.

t. WAITHI

cn,outta.

"lIDlntL
.1I ~UI1" 'I~U

TCI' lJTUI1L ('011\111101 tlOIlt&.

.. rl uut ••• rnt.t ""'11. 111'

"Hlf .tl"'I~n .IPLII,III ..

HL II , ItI ..

1.llC.95!.

1.11C.9~!'

2

hUDtedNor,8.lnc.
' .. un.....

U'.

398

AERONAUTICS.

£.'. llone
UUGlrflL
U." M. "'"

& I. IIO •• i.
.
(l , UDItTD.

~'u.n,l" nUl

.,,.. .. 'n... '....... IU4
.,.,,

1.120.11!8.

"
'htcW kl, 1.14-

1,1110,128•

p&l.etIW: Dec.

a. 1114.

11.1.U"...uutL

IIIU~UltL

£.1 TSOWPIOI,
IIdlll,ntt..
U'I.lU'III ' IU"UIk,IOIl

1, 123.048.

1,180.300.

FI (}.

WITNESSES

htellted ..... 2,I.J l

. .. 'n ......I.I,.

e

~ .~

INVENTOR
E . .J.THOH""Ol<

~ ""~ArN.

399

AERONAUTICS,

t . J.

tBOllfSO• •
CUlC!&nn.

UIIJ.Ult. II~U

"I.n lrl'lCK£,
U U IIIIUL

If ,tn . IlII,

",!'(Jun•• ""' ...... n."n.

Patented Kat. t., lIIl~

1.130,550.

III"'''''U""

~~:'L

J.

e::::::;;:;~

WITH!:55f.5

INVENTOR

~~

~

e..l.THQI1PsoH

ff(~mY. .

C.I.

1. ~.SI'W,.

tEMUOI([ ~

',c;U 'U UT" .

i "!.WIlIiIl.
~lUh"'IU'u",t."'"

1.14~.779.
J'{9:.'~

t~

lUlU......., ' •.

FIG. B

H

hteGtoUane t2,

",,,,,(01'" "'" n"''t,ll ..
Pt.tlDIed.JlIlIlI 22, 191s"

119·':;"_0«,1,

.,
,,
.t

.~

400

AERONAUTICS.

Le: "CHUO.

, • • • 1400,U,

...n r..t.mte4 AUB. 10,
.

''''I~,Urt.

~,~~'::-u

""!"""/II.. ".,.,",..
1914.~

-"--5q.l.

1
915-

D. D.'UICI(.
, },JI UU II',

hUUtlll:

1,1\19,029,

"n',t.

I l nO_~II" .

' , W 1I006U.
.

......>(.n"'. /lUI

.l'wD~

.... ;,.\'I ~u••

" '1. 1""
' ... 11 ....... tll..

-ng3:

"'--

PC ~ab~...l';r..7to~.9u

111.11 ttl It. ,,, ..

~1t'nted'No ... 30.191"

hltakdNO'f.2. 1915-

.

"""',

401

AERONAUTICS.

t. f . .sCIIUll.

1,172,397.

( . CI. $IIO
ln.

[ , O 'HOIIlI.
.

l , 179,~e8 .

I"ig.i .

U"~IIII"

1'I~I.t!dA,r. 18. 1911),
, ·· ,,· ... IOC I' "

~~~c-

IY'~CI

.N

72805°-S. Doc. 550, 64-2--26

l , 179, ~66.

''''''U'''' IIII, , ,,, 11. 1111 , '

402 .

AERONAUTICS.

r .. Uf.o~.

"I>JTtlil'tD lltC.lI,J 'O&
1. J, COO l .

I., U '.OU.

coor"

1A.rtNn:D D~ ·l1. ; 101.

•
J, I .
C1Uo'ItTtA rOI EXPLOSIVE £1(OIIEL
.."~It~rIU nu'l . . ... " ...

q.&1lI11'.~~~!.~~! ~~:.~~~~~f~Ollfti.

• IIUr-1l1l I.

~.".

~<·Uuc ....",~

~");J.~
.&t..~

(l.11. ITtlaOf:4,

1. naUSEt..

ruu,r.,aacJ.ulIIrTU...
U'nl.UIU

1,126,159.

J

f l lU

rn . ... , " , ..

403

AERONAUTICS.

E.O.-lfl1 n Otll,

..

~. tr.. nwco ~n

cwumn.

d .. o~
,n1.lh"ulIu . , n u ,lill.

b .uuUlu 'UUI ",: 11, J!'t.

p',LeutM ROY. 2I, leIL

1,010,066.

t. O NEwco n .
.
U IIUUttL
. n lJ..~rlf1 Tl a~.n.

1,010,066.

hteuted M
O'f.23; 1911.

1,010,066,

J. W
.,LOrtBO
Olt.

t. I . Boott .

OUICU't'tL
".

.,n.O
Ulo.tll.U ..,...,

)01",

P'~nt.ed

NO'J. 2&,1II IL

1,02t5,816~

U II.

ht.eDt.ed -"' '7, 1012.

404

AERONAUTICS.

Subclass J'!J.6-Valved fuel inlet between air inlet valve and throttle, fuel valve controlled independently by vrwuum or air flow.-On
page 402 (838,085, Dec. 11, 1906, Cook) the fuel valve is operated
by a diaphragm, while the air enters a series of spring check valves.
The flow itself lifts the flow disk and controls the lift of the metering
pin, on page 402 (918,607, Apr. 20, 1909, Sturges), air entering
through a fixed primary and an automatic secondary passage. Action of the vacuum on a piston moves the fuel valve on page 402
(1,126,159, Jan. 26, H115, Dressel), the fuel entering the air through
a nozzle in the path of the stream from an automatic air valve.
Subclass lB.7, variable float chamber presswre.-The combination
of a gravity loaded automatic air valve actuating a long fuel metering pin, with control of float chamber pressure by an adjustable air
flow through it to the mixing chamber, is illustrated on page 403.
(1,010,066, :r ov. 2 , 1911, Newcomb.) On page 403 (1,025,816, May
7, 1912, Lofthouse & Booty) there is shown an air inlet of gas holder
form with a mercury seal, the side walls having slots. As ociated
with it to move simultaneously in the opposite direction is a fuel
tube sealed also in mercury and with fuel floating on the top. The
fuel escapes by gravity through a hole at whate,er depth beneath
the surface may be fixed by the air bell. The fuel then rises with the
air. The float chamber pressure is equalized, so the fuel flow "ill be
purely by gravity head.
Class 13- Ca1'buret01's, prOl)01'tioning flow aspirating, single fuel
and multiple air inlets, both with regulating valves.-This is practically a modification of the common auxiliary air valve class by adding to it a fuel valve, the action of which is expected to connect and
compensate for the deficiencies of the same combination "ITithout the
fuel valve and indicates a failure to accept the fixed fuel inlet with
its air-yalve compensators as adequate.
Part of the air enters through an automatic valve leading to a
throttle-controlled port on page 409 (813,653, Feb. 27, 1906, Law),
part enters directly through one fixed inlet as primary air, and still
another part through another fixed inlet as secondary air. The fuel
valve is controlled by the throttle that also controls such secondary
air as first enters through an automatic yalve, a somewhat complex
combination. Al 0 unusual is the arrangement on pages 409 and 410
(817,903, Apr. 17, Hl06, Comstock), in which the fuel valye delivering fuel to the primary air is controlled mechanically with the secondary air, the primary air carrying the fuel meets the secondary
diluting air at a distance where the two pipes join on top of the
engine. One of the stationary-engine schemes is lllustrated on page
410 (876,519, Jan. l±, 1908, Brothers), having a fixed primary air
inlet and a secondary air s"ing valve linked to a threaded fuel needle
valve, both being under goyernor control. It is difficult to see how
such an arrangement in the absence of a throttle could maintain any
definite proportionality, because as needle and secondary air valves
close, the yacuum on the primary air inlet must increase and its flow
as well.
A fixed primary air inlet and automatic secondary are associated
with a fuel valve that lifts directly with the yacuum acting on a
piston at its top on page 412. (1,132,93-4:, lUar. 23, 1915, Heitger.)
Another power-driven-fan case, this time falling in the class of
single variable fuel and multiple variable ail' inlets, is shown on
page 410. (1,154,530, Sept. 21, 1915, Merriam & York.) The fuel

AERO~ AUTICS.

405

needle valve, located in a fixed primary air Venturi throat, is regulated by the speed of a fly-ball governor, which also adjusts simultaneously the secondary air. The mixture enters the fan casing at its
center and is discharged at a pressure in excess of atmosphere, but
proportionality will evidently vary with the engine inlet header pressure, which is the fan back pressure whenever flow changes without a
speed change. The torque produced by the air striking the curved
vanes of what would be an air turbine, were it free to rotate, causes
it to turn slightly on its screw-threaded stem, thereby controlling a
fuel valve, on page 412. (1,158,324, Oct. 26, 1915, Smlth.) .An automatic secondary ail' val,e is pro,ided.
A fixed primary with an automatic secondary air inlet combination has a fuel valvB that opens by turning in its threaded casing,
the turning being caused by the rise of a flow disk in the mixture path,
which rotates as it rises because of a helical rib engaging a notch on
its edge, the fuel valve stem being square is turned thereby. This is
shown on page 412. (1,178,064, Apr. 4, 1916. Fahrney.)
ubclass 13.1-JValved fuel inlet, fixed primary ai1', ,fixed or primary
secondary air inlets, th1'ottle control of fuel inlet valve.-Fixed primary air passes upward around the regulating fuel valve and meets
secondary air enterin~ through a tapered slot in the side of the cylindrical sleeve throttle IS on page 411. (886,265, Apr. 28, 190 , Speed.)
A yoke from the throttle stem actuates a sliding cam and roller gear for
moving the fuel val'e. Rotation of a barrel sleeve throttle surrounding the fuel inlet and a cross tube for primary air controls the secondary air by a port opposite to the throttle port and lifts the fuel
needle by an inclined cam surface rotated under a lever attached to it
in the form on page 411. (950,423, Feb. 22, 1910, Anderson.) Two
fuel inlets, one fixed and the other varying, are similarly located and
act as one, the fixed serving only to insure the accuracy of the opening for idling, on pages 411 and 412. (976,258, Nov. 22, 1910, Gallagher.) The throttle controls fuel needle and the secondary air
port. An example of a fuel needle placed at a distance from the fuel
inlet nozzle is shown on page 413. (1,029,796, June 18, 1912, Dawson.) The nozzle is located in a fixed primary air inlet, and the
throttle controls a pair of secondary air ports and the fuel needle
\"ahe. L ocation of the regUlating needle valve in a tapered air
throat associated with a secondary sliding air sleeve beyond it, both
sleeve and needle being operated by linkage from a damper throttle
is illustrated on pages 413 and 414. (1,065,462, June 24, 1013, Miller.) A comparatively recent form of the rotating barrel sleeve
acting as both throttle and secondary air valves at opposite ports,
and carrying a fixed primary air inlet along the axis, the fuel needle
valye cam operated by the rotation, is shown on page 414. (1,125,339,
Jan. 19, 1915, Keizer.) Here the primary air throat lies wholly
within the barrel and is provided with a bend or side outlet shroud
on top.
As an example of the effect of change of time in improying form,
the same elements as were incorporated in figure 390 are again brought
together in a new structure on pages:l:14 and 415 (1,148,485, JUly ~(,
1915, Gallagher) about five years later. Attention is called to the
substitution of a good form of tapered throat for the primary air
instead of the former irregular one with no definite directi on and
making many eddy currents, the substitution of a damper for II longitudinal cylindrical throttle, a concentric for a side float chamber,

406

AERONAUTICS.

while retaining a linkage between the secondary air, the fuel needle
and the throttle, and finally the separate low-speed fuel orifice.
Subclass 13.~-1Jalved fuel i71let, valved primary and secondary air
inlets, throttle control of both air i71lets and the fuel i71let valve.Again, the throttle is retained as the prime variable element of control, this time varying all areas with it, that of both of the air inlets
and the fuel, on the old assumption that areas rather than pressures
are the fundamental variables in proportionality maintenance as
quantity varies, instead of giving due weight to both and using as
the prime variable some unit that is a measure of flow.
On page 416 (1,134,366, Apr. 6, 1915, Barnes) a tapered throat is
provided with a central tapered plug, serving as a primary air valve
and sliding with the fuel needle on a fixed sleeve, and to it is connected a secondary air sleeve, and this triple-moving member acts as
the throttle. The varyin~ throat and fuel inlet relation itself acts as
a compensation factor in this case. A rotating barrel sleeve acts similarly by controlling the outlets of both primary and secondary air
passages, the same motion varying the fuel needle position on pages
416 and 417. (1,162,111, Nov. 30, 1915, Simpson.) The fuel inlet is
here set in front of the air restriction so that it receives less vacuum
than in the previous case.
Subclass 13.3-Valved fuel inlet, fixed primary, and throttle-controUed secondary air inlets, fuel valve controlled by the va;cuwm or
air flow independently.-Making the variable air depend on the
throttle and the fuel variation on the flow directly is a good example
of mixed variables, because the two things that should vary together
might naturally be expected to receive their motion from the same
instead of different sources. Two examples only are given on page
418 (1,081,222, Dec. 9, 1913, Durr) , having again the double-ported
rotating barrel to serve as secondary air and throttle valve. It is,
however, screw threaded in its casing, so that it has a small axial
motion with rotation. A spring-resisted piston within it carries
the fuel valves and a fixed primary air passage passes through the
end of the casing and through the piston rod to. the central fuel
opening. The fuel valve lifts an amount fixed by the spring tension
and the vacuum, and thereby regulates the fuel delivered to the
primary air, the amount of which is small. The old air impact flow
disk is used to control the fuel in a chamber supplied with fixed
primary and automatic secondary air arranged with an electric
heater to operate on kerosene, as shown on page 418. (1,131,157,
Mar. 9, 1915, Percival & Patterson.)
Subalass 13.4.-Valved fuel i71lets, fixed primary and a:utomatio
valved secondary air inlets, fuel valve controlled by the th?'ottle.As the use of the automatic secondary air valve in place of throttle
control is a proper step, especially for the high capacity variable
speed engine, it seems questionable that the throttle should be selected
at the origin of fuel-valve regulation, but there are quite a number of
cases of this sort.
A cam connection is provided between a damper throttle and the
fuel needle on page 419 (870,052, Nov. 5, 1907, Schebler) and applied to a carburetor of the common fixed primary and automatic
secondary air form. The fact that a fuel-valve adjustment is suggested at all for a carburetor of this large old class is a measure of
lack of confidence in the adequacy of the compensation it affor ds

AERONAUTICS.

407

without the fuel valve. Another case of cam-lifted fuel valve operated from a damper throttle in conjunction with a fixed primary
and automatic secondary air inlet is shown on page 419. (1,052,917,
Feb. 11, 1913, H eitger.) A combination of separated fuel-inlet
nozzle and regulating fuel valve, the latter operated from a damper
throttle and the former associated with a fixed primary and automatic secondary air inlet, is shown on page 422. (1,096,569, May 12,
1914, Sharpneck.) The fixed primary and automatic secondary air
inlets are used in combination with the rotating sleeve throttle turning a screw-threaded fuel valve in its fixed casing, on page 422.
(1,106,226, Aug. 4, 1914, Lamb.) Use is made of the long taper fuel
metering pin fixed to a flat block form of throttle on page 420
(1,106, 02, Aug. 11, 1914, Goldberg), in connection with fixed primary and automatic secondary air inlets, but in such a way as to
partially restrict the primary air passage. On page 420 (1,173 762,
Feb. 29, 1916, Arquembourg), a regulating fuel valve cam operated
from the shaft of a barrel throttle is combined with a fuel nozzle
located in a Venturi throat, beyond which the secondary air enters
through ball-type automatic valves.
Subclass 13.5-Valve fuel inlet, fixed priJrnary and autom.aJtic
valved 8econdary air inlet8, fuel valve controlled by the automatic
8econdary air valve.-Assuming that the old standard fixed fuel and
primary air carburetor "ith automatic secondary air compensation
to be inadequate for the severe conditions of the variable-speed engine, and that some additional means of compensation is necessary,
then it is quite a natural and logical step to make this take the form
of a fuel valve adjustment controlled by the secondary air valle on
the ground that up to the time the latter opens the fuel area should
vary with the additional air area, or that both areas should be controlled by the vacuum. This seems to be the origin of the ideas of
the cases of this subclass, one of the earliest of which is that on page
421. (855,170, May 28, 1907, Gray.) A direct connection is made
between the automatic secondary air valve and the fuel valve, so
both move the same amount in this case. A bell-crank linkage is
provided to connect a horizontal-stem automatic air vah'e and a
vertical-stem fuel valve on page 421. (981,853, Jan. 17,1911, Halladay.) Location of the fuel needle on the axis of the automatic air
vaive, the stem guide of which is tubular and serves as the fixed
primary air inlet, is illustrated on page 421. (1,010,185, Nov. 28,
1911, Schulz.) A tubular sleeve form of fuel valve, forming the
stem guide of the secondary air valve, is shown on page 42L
(1,022,,702, Apr. 9,1912, Rothe & Culp.) A cam connection between
the automatic air ,alve and the fuel needle is shown on page 423
(1,078,590, Nov. 11, 1913, Muir), which also illustrates the idea of a
throttle limit to the movement, so that, while it is automatic and
completely so for a wide-open throttle, it is not for a partly closed
throttle, and at any time closure of the throttle closes both fuel and
secondary air val,es. Two fuel valves operated by the automatic
air valve are shown on pages 423 and 424 (1,111,224, Sept. 22, 1914,
Hamilton), but so located as to act as one, so far as proportionality
is concerned. Of course, two different fuels can be simultaneously
used. A lever connection between the secondary air valve and the
fuel valve is shown on page 424 (1,118,126, Nov. 24, 1914, Harroun),
which also has electrical heating coils in the primary air tube in-

408

AERONAUTICS.

tended to adapt it to kerosene. It is of interest to compare this with
the same proportionality arrangement adapted to u e exhaust heat
both for warming the primary air and for directly heating the primary mixtures, as shown on page 424 (1,158,494, Nov. 2, 1915, Harroun), to which an air-yalve dashpot is added as well.
Use of a very much restricted primary air venturi, as illustrated
on page 425 (1,156,823, Oct, 12, 1915, Schebler), hardly more than
will serve to lift the fuel and to somewhat spray it. This brings
this subclass very close, indeed, to th at of subclass 12.5, -with all its
favorable functional characteristics. It is an excellent example of
the way in which one class merges into another, and neces arily so,
no matter what the classification basis may be.
Subclass 13.6-Valved fuel inlet, valved primary and secondary air
inlets, both automatic, fuel valve controlled by one or both automatic
air inlet valves.-In essential principle this subclass is the same as
that of subclass 7.5, though structurally the difference is real, being
that of two valves versus one. Of course, if the valves are different,
especially in size and loading, then control of the fuel valve does
not so directly proportion fuel to total air as -with t-wo similar Yah-es
which would be equivalent to one. If one such , alve will serve the
purpose, some other reason than a search for proportionality must
be responsible, and one reason that certainly applies in some ca es
is a failure to realize the fact.
Two spring-loaded automatics, nearly similar, are used on page
426 (917,125, Apr. 6, 1909, Pierce), one of them controlling the fuel
valve by a cam surface on its stem. This one is fitted -with a throttle
resistance, while the other is free. A pair of s-wing checks of different size are both connected to a bell-crank needle-yalve control, and
they therefore act as one on page 426. (1,022,326, Apr. 2, 1912,
Namur.) Four small spring-loaded secondary air valves are added
to a central automatic piston sleeve primary automatic, controlling
the fuel-metering pin, on page 426. (1,0 4,954, Jan. 20, 1914, Nice.)
A single piston and sleeve form of automatic yalve controls two sets
of air ports, the one above acting as secondary and a lo-wer annual
port as primary air passage. The moYing member adjusts the fuel
,alve at the same time on page 427. (1,087,1 7, Feb. 17, 1914,
Schulz.) The primary air is small and is a conyenient means of lifting and spraying the fuel. The action is entirely equivalent functionally to the previous class referred to. As arranged on page 428
(1,105,134, July 28, 1914, Hanemann ) the primary automatic air
valve controlling the fuel valve is entirely different from the
secondary, and the action must also be different with respect to
proportionality.
On page 427 (1,125,525, Jan. 19, 1915, Hathcote, is shown a form
that again illustrates how closely one class merges into another, this
case being, except for the proportion of the fixed to the valve controlled air, similar to those of subclass 12.5 more especially those
examples of that class that have a small fL~ed air passage passing the
fuel inlet for idling and for lifting the fuel into the main air stream,
but not enough air to be considered as remoyino- complete air control
from the automatic valve. Here the central fixed hole is too large to
be ignored in this way, but it would be impossible to draw a line of
division with precision.

409

AERONAUTICS.

1.' L lI,"S:
'

r. •. uw.

UTtJiTtD' I'tJ.

2 UO&.
'.

U Ttlf'rtD

" •. II M S$.
r . l ,UI'I'
OUBORtT!:l.
" f~IUl ln

rn:u

"1.1"'_

rti. i1J 1~'~

-t'; A. U" ,
o.&.nO l n tll.

011101t t£l.

...." 11U."\I.'IIU " ... '.,.;,,,

UHI" Tl U' I L U ~ rI . "' I _

'l'UtJjitD !Pl. 17; UOL

lft.al7.faa.

... . S. DOlllSTOCI.
'O.t.uoatTEI.
u n l U ' I " ' I LU . ". II. lfll.

410

.~ ..

AERONAU TICS.

1I1J O$.

.P,UtlttD .lPl.11. 111)&,
4 •••• COal:ITOU.
CAIIOlfTti•
• "lIU, •••

run

11I. "UlI,

,.(Ttn!D IU. H , not.

" nOTana.

.(lame rouullo DeViCt 1'01 I,TUUt. OOIiIOITIO. t"O J. tI.

U UI, I _

u Ulunn Plu1!IUf. II, ' _

..........

j'lthctnr,

¢1~

..-L~s.ComstLc}(,.

.by

~~

y~~

~

.,e..-_

" t . toIU.IAi. ' l . ... lORIt.:

1 ,154,530 .

f'

c. M(RlltAill. ,

l . M YOU.
.

(un_, Itt.

1,154,530.

...... .COII • • "IU . ..... " , " ...

r---------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ---- --- ----------,

411

AERONAUTICS.

t.. ,WDEUOI.
unlf itl"

rlloUrn. n.n".,

....... ' ...... ltl~

9 00,423.

. y.pn-elan

~

1f.~,..~.s.I~.s ."·

t:;h-';~it

L.1MDUaO lf.

,...,um.

."u~ .,,,~

900,423 . .

• . W. O.l.LL.lOB(iI.

1I UJ IU. II. It ....

P&tellz,ed No' . 22. 1110.

.~-

/l4Io/~

:r..-.""-t!:;. ,

412

AERONAUTICS.

r . Jl. UltOtL

I. II. SIIUII.

("""n,..

"'U"""'".U"U .,n,..

"""lUI ... ' .. ' ..... , .......

1,1118,324.

[.H . rA.HIIIlY.

1,168,324,

Plleotecl Oral 20. 1915.
'''"1-..,.,. ,.

1,178,064.

.

413

AERONAUTICS.

C. t , DAWIO ••
'UtUlm rOI 'UDOGUO" tlf'l..c:.lft 01 OC U OltllLt

L • • O.I.LUOBtI.

on .DlttO.

.ll~Z

or LI'IItOl ron in.LlJ.,

' ''''UIU I n " ... ' ,1111

1,029,796 .

i"u.ul"'IU .... . II. ' ....

976,Z68.

PI~Q.tedJII.D'11l.1012.

f't'rf"lfltJA
r~',u./" ,~,..u .

"(3~t~~l4.<.t~~
"' lr~J

lur~UT'llI '01 .&GODa,o "

c. t. DA'II'SOIt
U'IMI't o. COIII.CtTnu II llTO .. '
U H I " .. U!IUI"'

1,029,796.

.. II . ..

8 . A. WILLtl.

,r

t .. unCTtl.

110010 ,:,tL "0 lll,.

rateQ\edJIlDIU, IOl2.
,'nlT~.. ,nL

. ,"""

OIJAtlITllnY':1IIf

~.~
~rr.'!1(fII

unlu,M. ,.u"nl"inl.

1,066,462.

htmlted l ll11eZ4.lIIl.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------~,

414

ABRON AUTICS.

R. I., MU.c.n..

1.. " . nJztl.

tunltT;L

.,n".,lurU"1

" "" I'I ~

hloeDt.r!'JUDe U. JIll

1.06b.462.

IlhlT'l-4una.

1. 126,339.

Pwoted. /&.11.11,1'16.
.

Y'YJJ:~'

~
.

.r

J,~

,(.J(u. '/! a JIId,,-,

~-

to. ... ItItl:I.

1.126.339.

Hniut:::!!'~I~~.. I..·I.ll

1. ";.GAllA'"El.
C,tlIU IiUL

'PateQ.ted Jaa)9,1810;
11}l1 1n4'lU' "

-

.,,,,(..111.. , ...1, ~''' I'' t l(,

, .. un·.. "."

415

AERONAUTICS.

fl.

W~

GALLAGHER.

CAillaUIiETER.
"rUUT!OIf!lEOA.US.I,nll.

1,148,485.

Pate.tod July 27. 1915.
1 IIIU'I-III(" I .

416

ABRONA UTICS.

l. l. uun.

\. T. tAlliES.

curunn.

1,134.368.

"''''''"'.'10'' ,ul •. In,

( , I. SIN'IOH,
tlolUtu1l.

[.1. S''''50''.
, UlIIfIUU •

..,.....",.. ,111. ·',,1.. ,,,\.
1.162,111..

.., ..": ",h'.... n. """

f.frnfed Kot. 30, 1916· .!1I1_·CIt....

.rh·f- ·
1'"

6

'-

zaw<irrr..r.Jfm1'''9Tl.
' BY

?: ~~

/,.....IGTO/t

CuwOT"d .T.Simp~o~ .

A_

.fL.~~
t1'"

417

AERONAUTICS.

[. I. SIMPSON.
CAII8UR£TER.
""~ICUIO II JI~tD

1,162,111.

110'1' , ', !tH.

p.tented Non 30. 191 •.
I'Mun-,Mut, .

.J"h·7'·

WI TNESSES;

~~f~
8!). .f~

I NVENTOR

.EO'aJQ7'i7J. Sirnf>30rt.

~ r' ?&~
AllofM$l

72805 °-S. Doc. 55!), 64-2--27

418

AERONAUTICS.

, . • . r&IOIUL"",. Utl£UOII '
I tlOlP t. OiJ or,;nuroL
•

·' , Dna.

· ""~1.~"\t.\tu.

~"'HI"1' ''r '1~1(t

' l.181.1~7 .

IIU N . tOU.

419

AERONAUTICS.

.... *'•.on.

, .. no,oll;

• • It.IOI£.tj:L
OilJOutEL

U.ttfTtp 10 ....
8, 1I, IOIULn •
' OlUOlETCL

U"''',''''I riu. O",tI,,'"

't 1101•

""U·"lU,U"""'.II.U",

~4#:,.

f

IJ

,

."

"

~""."t.o~

'-" __ ,.,._H.Sud /Cll"{

~(l.It_"1fI
~t ltOtJ.
QU.OUTn.

F: 8.

r. II. BelTOn.
on.G
utta.

.furfUltI'11J' ' ' ' ', ''; 1I1t.

1,062,917,

Pat.eat.ed feh. II. 1t1s,

.,ru.4t1f111\ .. ·Ut. ... ......

1,062,917.

Patoatod P&b. II, IOI3.

F~~_3_

I

•
...,
v:
I

J.'V I'Dfl'O-'

F.,.Q:"k

U . He.lt, ~ ,

~
fI'I7OAIf6r;

I NYIN7fJ/t.

l1'N."h n.Helr, . . . . . . .

"
~

420

AERON AUTICS.

J. L GGLDltlG.

) 1. OOLD'tIO.
UnaUH:L ,

1,106,602.

PaI.eot.ed.AQ&. 11. 1t14.

(14 .... 0U( W. OURG

l'ateAted Fell. 29. 191&.,

Pt.W\tl!d

1.173,7 62.

Ftb.~.l9t6.

. " .U....... II'

Fig 2 .

e'

421

AERONAUTICS.

I , D OUT.
.

~

urm!r~~:~u~:!.II "U'"

, . 1I'41LJ.D&T.

981,868.

NeDw ItA 17.1'lL

w. r.BOT!t.

'W, r.808 DLZ.
I!U II;III:'I'Q,

E. t. CDLP,

C,,.aILTU

UHIC U IU r lu. HI " . UN.

UHIOU'II

1 , 010,18~.

Pattuted Nn.2&, I IIIL

...?~A:

"?

~--.

.

riD

0"-

V?

r

1,022,702 •

fI~n

I U n .1OII.

422

AERONAU TICS,

r

r.•. I I .... n£Ol.

' . SBU,/f£CI.

c;n.o m u"

C:UUlntl.
U fUl.lIU

nut . . .. n . UII..

unl',"'" nu . .... n , ""'-

1,096,069.

If'.iln~.13eJ I
~~.

hteG\ed"'11 2, 1'1~

"

I3tJfrR.:~

::z;;ce.,L

Franlll. Sha?necd:~

8"c..e..-..:
(3 OJ (i2.;J.....A

... . G. LU' •.

1,106,226.

Invenlor',

W,'lne:sse.s:

~:-:;;
•. e. LAMI.

1,106,226.

423

AERONAUTICS •

• • • • 11: 011.

•. t .

·c,.~un:a.

ukJ'~f1.. tlu.

euntoi .

"" !'1t!'-

l ,07B.590 .

htaDted 8ept.22,lU'
. unt~h

"T. !UULTOI'.

.. <f. 9UU LTO I .

'," UI1f1~I~~"II. IOI"
1,111,21)4.

1;111,21)4. •

Feg.2.

..
"S.

~

"

"

..

~

It

...

..

..

424

AERONAUTICS.

I,-t . U MILtOlf,

1. "', 114111001'.

1.111,224.

1,118,126.

lig.4-.

B.f';'

e

........{ !z:. ......
: .. )

...._. :'._.. > -.-_.. .

,.

"

47

J,. ... ,~

. h'a.y lL .//a.rroulc,

'" Yc.ur (/,o-.I\\A.6.Mf
~ U'"~

It , W. IIAU OU II.

1,108,494.

hleDrodNO". 2.IlJla.

1 . 1~8 .494.

- -- - - - --

-

-

-

- --

425

AERON AU'IICS.

G. M. SCHEBltR.

CAIllt.l8ETU .
A'~llUTUj. flUO n l . ) , 1'12. U_[WCDU'f . 4, 1'lt.

Patented

1,156,823.

~
7,z
-//
•

- -

-

.

(Jet.

12. 1915

-.-

.-.-.-

.-.-

' -

' r-- ' -

_._.---.. _._._._._.dH'tXA- tct
'

6""'7,4(. 5cheJ/",;

+'~~.~

tlftot-'"'1

426

AERONAUTIOS.

...-

I . UM O
L

I. l . l"IDOL
""'UU1 1t",.Ut'U, "'.1I1f.

917.18G.

tat........ " ..

.DW't Ntu'I::Pi:"rn.

~
'~IIY

t . ll iet.

t . ..ct
(UUU To.
"'HI.. rr" , ,~.U I " . IO."

1.084.964.

II.

1.084.904.

Pat.o.\.ed Ja.a..!O, ltl4.
l u ll1 ...... II ' .:

427

AERON AUTICS.

J.. O. UtBCOCL
OIU ; UTU,.

unl ...... rn n Nt. L ."..

1,196,626.

c. r. ICBOLZ,
OUJOlntl.
",u""" .n.... Ua. t. Il It.

£.I""(:IUII'I.
en.glnta.
un" U 'U,ILU . " , II: IOU.

428

AERONAUTICS.

' I. . " . FUJltLL
N.Q QICTtL

1. " ,-Uunr..
hUDUTU.

1.1113,008.

."~ Iou t .. n~u II I It " "

"" '1"'1" rJ~U H .II to U l t

1,123,008.

h~llt«lJI.D.Ii,ltl~
1l.I..Un... I I I ' ..

AERONAUTICS.

429

Class 14-- 0arburet01"s, proportioning flow, aspirating, multiple
fuel and air inlets, both with regulating valves.-It would seem as
if sufficient compensation could be secured by regulating fuel to air
or air to fuel, and certainly the opportunities are great with air and
fuel both regulated eYen when there is only one inlet for each, without adopting a multiplicity of such, yet this is done in the cases of
this class. However, the situation is not as complex as it might seem,
because in the first place there are not many such ca es, and second,
these all fall into t,,·o groups, the high and low speed group or the
multiple duplicate carburetor group, each of which constitutes a subclass.
On page 428 (1,123,508, Jan. 5, 1915, Farrell), a series of five fuel
needles is arranged across an air passage, and they are operated from
a single rocker shaft by lever arms set at slightly different angles, so
that they open in succession and once open continue to increase the
fuel-flow area as later ones come in. This rock shaft is linked to the
throttle and to a swing type of air-inlet valve, the entering air
sweeping successively the fuel jets as they come into action.
Subclass 14.1-Two fuel inlets, one fixed and one valved supplementary high-speed jet, two ai1' inlets, one fixed primary and one
'valved seoonda7"lJ.-A single air inlet fitted with a damper type of
Yalve, acting in the dual capacity of throttle and air valve has a hole
in it, through which projects a fixed fuel nozzle for low-speed mixed
flow. The damper motion controls a single variable fuel val,e with
multiple outlets in the combination on page 431. (1,038,0-1:0, Sept. 10,
1912, Weiss.) As the air valve swings open the fuel valve is opened
and at the same time the air sweeps past the multiple outlets in varying degrees so that at first some dischar~e fuel, while others take in
spraying air that emerges with the fuel elsewhere, though all discharge fuel later. The fixed idling jet nozzle is perforated so that
it acts as a mixed-flow passage when the throttle is closed or nearly
closed.
Two air inlets are provided on page 431 (1,164,661, Dec. 21, 1915,
Muir), one fixed and one variable, the former with a fixed fuel inlet
for low speed, the latter with a fuel valve controlled by the automatic air valve for higher speeds. This is another example of how
closely classes merge one into another, for if the fixed air passage
were closed or nearly so, it could be regarded as a low-speed or
idling jet for a carburetor of the single variable fuel and air class.
This would be the case also if the fixed jet were subjected to the same
vacuum influence as the main jet, because then it would be a multiple outlet single jet instead of a multiple jet. A small fixed fuel and
air inlet for low speed delivers beyond a main barrel throttle on
page 432 (1,172,031, Feb. 15, 1916, Morand), the main passage consisting of fixed primary air, with secondary and fuel valve controlled by the throttle. Two air passages, a primary with a ball
form of automatic air valve, and the other or secondary with a damper air valve, associated with two fuel nozzles, are shown on page
422. (1,1 '79,381, Apr. 11, 1916, Sunderman.) A linkage connects the
high -speed fuel-inlet valve and the secondary air damper to the
throttle. Graduation of the high-speed fuel inlet by the movement
of a secondary automatic air valve, is illustrated on page 433
(1,179,386, Apr. 18, 1916, Anderson), in connection with a fixed lowspeed jet in a fixed primary air inlet.

430

AERO NAUTICS.

Subclas8 142- MultipZe aarbwret01'8, progre8sive, by throttZe or
vaauum.-A series of eight fuel inlets, each with a regulating valve
and each in a separate passage, the air to which varies wIth the
t hrottle outlet from it, are combined in one casing by using a multip orted barrel sleeve for all air valves and throttle, the separate
passages being formed within it, as shown on page 434. (1,120,184,
Dec. 8,1914, Duff.) A separate idling fixed jet and air inlet are provided beyond the throttle.
Clas815-0arburetors, prop01'tioning flow, aspirating, thermo8tatic,
01' ba1'omet1'ic controlled.-Assuming that a carburetor of any class
whatever works satisfactorily at a given place under constant conditions of temperature and barometric pres ure, it does not follow that
the operation will continue to be satIsfactory when the surrounding
temperature or the barometric pressure changes. Of course, these
variations exert a certain influence on the vaporization characteristics of the fuel, acting directly on its vapor pressure on the one
hand and on the relation of the partial pressure of the vapor in the
mixture to that of the air on the other, when the total pressure
changes without a change of vapor pressure. These vaporization
difficulties, while serious enough in themselves, are not now under
discussion, attention being for the present concentrated on the proportionality problem, which is fundamental. Anything that changes
the density of air will change the flow through a given passage under
the influence of a given pressure drop, so that gIven a fixed vacuum
on a fixed carburetor air passage, the amount that will flow depends
on the air density, and as air density changes so will the flow change.
As both absolute pressure and air temperature exert direct effects on
air density, changes in them will directly cause a change in flow , the
amount of which may be very considerable. This is undoubtedly
greater in aero work than elsewhere, because a machine may leave
sea level and in climbing reach altitude where the barometric pressure
is half its previous sea-level value, a density effect of 50 per cent.
At the same time the air temperature may drop from over 100° in
southern or summer districts to something below zero in the high air,
which correspond roughly to a density change of 20 per cent in
order of magnitude in the opposite sense. From considerations such
as this it becomes clear that carburetors might very properly be provided with automatic compensation for air-density changes, and that
such should be provided for all those used in aero work.
Similarly, the flow capacity of a fuel passage, whether its characteristics are those of the orifice or of the capillary, depends on the
viscosity of the :fuel and may vary very much, indeed enough to
make the difference between success and failure if the viscosity
varies over the whole range that is possible with normal temperature
changes, especially in those cases where heat is being applied to
properly vaporize the heavier fuels or in using varying mixtures of
differently viscous fuels, or two such in succeSSIOn, through the same
passage. Neglecting the latter condition as one requiring special
treatment and concentrating on temperature change, it is clear, as in
the case of the air, that temperature variations in the fuel must not
be permitted to exceed a value fixed by the viscosity-temperature
curve of the fuel that would result in appreciable flow changes, say,
5 per cent as a limit. This will correspond to quite a different t em-

431

AERONAUTICS.

W.W. " Llli.

'.1. Wtla.

£,1. "tl88.

1.038,040.

A, J. WI!lU.

Pa1.eDted8opt.lo.UU2.
,"Uft-UJU ..

hteGt.od $apllO. 1912.

1,088.040.

. flUn-tIU' ",

IY

432

AERONAUTICS.

[ . [.M O
UND.

[ , ( , MOUHD.

hl&t.ed

t,179,031 .

'-.l5, 191&

'lOlli_lin,.

, ,' . Sl,)"01.Ut"~.

1,179,031 .

r.• . $UNOtlUwt.

~~

~ n-=Jf..,It~

433

AERON AUTICS.

R. M. ANDER'ON.
CARaURETU.
""LlCATlON fiLED 1 ,4.Ylt.UI1.

1 ,l 79 , ~86 .

Witnesses,.
.~A)~

?o-hI%:~

72805°- S. Doc. 559, 64-2--28

Patented Apr. 18. 1
910.

h zventor

.li'a Y'J};RSlCt .N._,fi';:.:!er

S d;t

..B.~
:9' fitt ornej's;

434

AERONAUTICS.

...........

LA,norr.

R. 1. Dorr.
• C.uVltTtL

'. uuun. i'1Jlu •••.,..ltl ..

l,1I!O,164.

.,'\lfl tlU 1lLU , . .... u l l.

.. ....... Doc.'.181~
• • uc' .... nn ~

AERONAUTICS.

435

perature range in the case of one fuel as compared with another.
Equivalent to control of this temperature range for the fuel, which
may not, and in some cases is not practical as interfering with vaporization, is, of course, compensation for it by control of vacuum or
flow area.
There are not many patents on this subject of temperature change
compensation or correction for air and fuel, or on barometric compensation for air, but it must be remembered that the realization of
necessity is recent, and more may be expected ~long this line.
Subclass lS.l-thermostatic controls.-Thls sort of control may
fall properly into two classes, one seeking automatically to keep the
temperature from changing, and the other compensating for a t emperature change by control of air or fuel valves.
The first case, that on page 436 (1,017,572, Feb. 13, 1912, Lund),
is an example of' the former kind. Two sources of air are provided, one hot and the other cold, the r atio determining the temperature at the carburetor, and in the present case a single valve
controls the ratio, the valve being actuated by the expansion or contraction of the walls of a body inserted in the path of the mixture.
This thermostat is filled with a volatile liquid and has an expanding
form of wall so the vapor pressure of this fluid is fixed by the main
mixture temperature, but unfortunately the mixture pressure exerts
a similar effect. Increase of vacuum due to a closed throttle, has the
same effect on the movement as a rise of temperature, both causing
the thermostat to expand.
The second class of control, direct compensation by valve adjustment for temperature change, is illustrated on page 436. (1,110,131,
Sept. 8, 1914, Green.) Here the air temperature changes operate
the fuel needle valve by means of the elongation of metal rods. A
more pertinent form of thermostatic compensator is that shown on
pages 436 and 437 (1,135,270, Apr. 13, 1915, Duryea), which adjusts
the fuel needle valve in accordance with the temperature of the air
supplied to the carburetor. In this case the actuating means of the
thermostat includes a closed tube, of mercury for example, with one
end attached to a Bourdon tube. Changes of temperature cause the
end of the Bourdon tube to move, and this adjusts the fulcrum of a
lever between the automatic air inlet valve and the fuel needle,
causing the latter to be adjusted automatically to air temperature
without interfering with its normal regulation with air flow changes.
Another case of fuel needle adjustment, but this time for changes
in the temperature of the fuel itself, independent of the air, such as
could be regarded as a viscosity corrector, is that on page 437.
(1,142,824, June 15, 1915, Lund.) Here the type of expanding wall
chamber, filled with a liquid or a gas or partly filled with a liquid
and partly with its vapor, now generally known as a syephon, is
submerged in the fuel in a jacketed chamber, which may be heated
or cooled. It has the fuel needle fixed directly to it and, as shown, it
is suitable only for carburetors that otherwise have fixed fuel inlets.
One special case of thermostatic compensation of some practical
value in dealing with fuels that are just over the border of volatility,
vaporizing freely enough for use with warm air or by the heat of
the passages leading to a warm engine, but not so when ail' and engine are cold, undertakes to solve the difficulty by opening the fuel
valve at first and later closing it as the engine heats up. One of

436

ABRON AUTICS.

I . t.

Lon.

". W. Glttll.

&n.t.Cl1lDfroacUICIU'fDI.

.. , uun"",-u.",,",u'l-

1.110.131.

t:CJ

/.~,-:?,'
. ,:~
'"

'''I
?-2

1. r. Ounu,.

J, r.OUI Y[A.

1.136.210.

PateDtL1CIApr.l3,l" l~

1,136.210.

Pa&ente4 Apr. l3.ltU5.

',.'n ....."' ..

437

AERONAUTICS.

J. f . .ounu.

1,13~,1I70.

J. f . flUn(ol.

l'atenUd Apr. l8,lSl I5.

..• u, .... "" •.

1. 1II . ...Unas.

1. I . l UNO.

c.,.u
un'A1JoUllf"',

1,142.824.

aUUOJn . n'C1.tllT,

' '''lU II• • IIIIt ' ~ I , •• '""

t., tLlh1lU rl~u

P1t~tNJulle16,1916.

H'.... u"

1,133,872.

ra~lItl4l1b.r,30.11l1~

..:r5-.L..

/

438

AERONAUTICS.

A.E. UGLAIID.
"u.,nATIC CO.llot. , .. . II:( .".. n " AWIcIHTlIL

J.',149,743.
~~~~=r~

t . r ,ly .."t$.
1p(I ....lim CbUIOl nWlCl'ot Ul'loSl'f.l'.'I'~

1.18'9,786,

..

!"'''.,.,l.lIn.

,t,f'NU, .....

NtelWlult4.lg16.

439

AERONAUTICS.

1t. lH:!tDlV Ii I.

r. IUDFt)lD.

• . IJ UTOW • I. t . Il.ll)r.o.lt.

e u.U l tTtl ro l IflUUL OOIilOnIO' UOi.Ut.

uugarrnrOllnUUL CO"UfIO. tUI,t:S.

.. , nUT'" 11\...... .. .. u.

P&t.eoted k3t, 1811

..'I.l••

lI.. . ln. . . . .. ull.

1,M9,038.

DU~LtR.
OllioanlL ·

p, D1IWLtll.

P.

Ol llOltTta.

i'nl"' I"I1~"" " ". uu.

1,098,783.

hteDWI*31.18t1

u nIH'ltJ.lIU. l i n ,", 1111.

htelltQlJUD.2,lgl ~

1;098,783.

m'

.'.
XbuJ.sLJ '
L ,;I

e-<--

c.J. ri.--

fi,n"ftr"'l
.A .. OIrf"""~

~=:::I3=";=]j7 ~~
t

~,,~

440

AERONAUTICS.

these actuated by the exhaust is shown on page 437 (1,133,872, Mar.
30, 1915, Maness), operates the fuel valve by the elongation of a
metal rod close to the exhaust pipe, and another, page 43 (1149,743,
Aug. 10, 1915, Ena-Iand), uses the elongation of a tube heated by
the jacket water. Both forms are directly applicable only to those
classes of carburetors that have an otherwise fixed fuel inlet.
A similar effect is sought by thermo tatic control of a separate
secondary air valve which is closed when the air or the engine is cold
so as to enrich the charge, and which opens when the temperatnre at
the thermostat rises, diluting the charge and compensating for an
over-rich mixture from the carburetor. Use is made of a thin metal
bending strip on page 438 (1,1 9,7 6, July 4,1£)16, Byrnes), in one
case operated by exhaust and in another by the air temperature, associated with various valve forms.
Subclas8 15.~, ba1'om.etric contro18.-A barometric diaphragm,
consisting of two flexible metal sheets, joined at the edges, inclosing
and forming a vacuum chamber, is fixed to the carburetor casing on,
one side and to the fuel needle on the other, on page 439. (1,04:9,038,
Dec. 31, 1912, Barstow &; Bradford.) .Any changes of barometric
pressure are compensated f or by movement of the fuel needle. Incidentally there is also provided a float and float-chamber form, mtended to work equally well at any angle of inclination of the carburetor from the vertical within a fairly considerable range. This
form is, of course, applicable only to carburetors with otherwise fixed
fuel inlets. Another form, shown on page 439 (1,098,7 3, June 2,
1914, Daimler), is adapted to be inserted III the train of linkage between a fuel needle and its normal source of adjustment for regulation with air flow, by moving the fulcrum of one otherwise fixed
point of a lever in the linkage.
SUMMARY OF CHARACTERISTICS OF
EW CLASSES AND CONCLUSIONS ON TYPE.

On the theory that the definition of a class or subclass of carbur etors is a statement of a principle of construction or functional operation directly or by implication, it would seem to be possible to
divide carburetors into good, fair, and bad groups by the class and
subclass divisions, and vffi'y desirable to do so as the first broad
treatment of the subject of de ign before undertaking any analysis
of structural details or dimensions. Unfortunately, however, this
very desirable prospect can not be fulfilled, because any classification
basis that is feasible and practical must be based primarily on the
more quickly recognized features of the appliance, and these alre
always structural an'angments from which principles of operation
must be discovered by later analysis, and the only principles of construction that can enter into class definitions are those of structu.:ral
arrangement. In all cases proportions of parts and at least relative
if not absolute dimensions playas important a part in the separation
of the good from the bad as does the g neral arrangement or grouping of the elements of construction, so much, in fact, as to be responsible for one of the greatest sources of difficulty in making the class
distinctions themselves. There may, for example, be two air inlets
located so that both air streams act as one, and the case should

AEROXALiIICS.

441

therefore be classed with those characterized structurally as having
one. Again, even though the two air streams act differently, one,
for example, acting as primary air .eassing the fuel jet and the other
as secondary entermg beyond it, stIll several possible class interpretations are possible because either the primary or the air inlets may
be so small as to be negligible, in which case two class interpretatations result: First, that of all air entering beyond the jet; and,
second, that of all air passing the jet in addition to the third "here
b'}th air streams exert a measurably equal influence. Moreo\-er, the
small air inlet while so small as to be negligible when entering the
mixing chamber directly may, on the contrary, be most potent in its
influence, if, for example, it passes through the top of the float chamber or into the fuel passage, either case representing a most important and different class characterized by either of these t"o important means of compensation.
In spite of such conditions as these, it is possible to draw some very
valuable class distinctions on the basis of possibilities of suitable
automatic control of proportionality as the {low rates change, but
not by the simple process of branding anyone class as good or bad
without qualification. EYen this sort of diyision is most useful because it points clearly the direction that efforts should follow to
improve and perfect the carbur etor, and sening to divert time and
money from the losses that must inevitably follow by their expenditure on the less promi ing types.
Of the 15 classes here established, not a single one can be wholly
approved, and only one, class No. I, wholly condemned, but naturally
the subclasses of each general class, 61 in an, can be judged better
than is possible for the general classes themselves. Even these, it
has 'been found, arc best judged as bad to fair, or fair to good,
r ather than good, fair or bad alone, except for one small set that is
clearly bad. This set includes those subclasses that consist of the
single fixed fuel and air inlets without any compensation whatever,
and designated as subclasses 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, 7 in all.
R emoving these 7 there remain of the 61 suhclasses 54 that merit
the broader ju dgment. Of these the following 20 are designated as
bad to fair, and constitute the gr oup that merits the lesser consideration, as being unequal to the rest in proportionality possibilities
for engines operating at varying speeds under variable loads : Subclasses 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.3, 8.5, 9.2, 9.4, 11.1, 12.1,
12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 13.1, 13.2, 13.4. All of these subclasses are provided
with proportionality compensation of some kind but considered not
as adequate or suitable as that of the foll owing 29, designated as
fair to good: Subclasses 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 5.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5,
8.2, 8.4, 8.6, 9.1, 9.3, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 11.2, 11.3, 12.5,
12.6, 12,.7, 13.3, 13.!), 13.6. These two sets, aggregatino- 49 subclasses
of double judgments with the previously noted 7 single judgment
group, account for 56 of the total of 61 subclasses.
Of the remaining fiye subclasses, three----9.5, 14.1, and 14.2-a1'e so
broad in definition as to make a class ju dgment impossible or what
is the same thing, to warrant a triple judgment of bad, fair, or good,
depending on the details of each case. The remaining two subclasses--15.1 and 15.2-concerned with thermostatic and barometric
control do not admit of a judgment on the same basis as the others be-

442

AERONAUTICS.

cause this sort of compensation to be useful must be added to but
can not serve as a substitute for compensation for fl ow rate proportionality influences.
All the general classes with the exception of class 1, which includes
only incompensated cases, and class 15, which is concerned only with
thermostatic and barometric supplemental compensation, are not to
be judged as good, fair, or bad as a class because each includes some
variation of from that may be classed many of the three ways.
For the variable speed, variable load engine, the carburetor that
consists merely of two passages, one for air and one for fuel, fixed in
both area and position, is of no value whatever, because no matter
what the form or relative position of the passages, the flow of the
fuel can not be made to follow in constant ratio that of the air. Depending on the fuel supply which may be under a constant positi,e
liquid head or be aspirated against a con tant negative liquid head,
and on the position of the fuel jet in the air passage which may be
located to be influenced by an air entrance resistance ,acuum or not,
and by a positive or negative air velocity head vacuum, the fuel flow
may increase faster than the air flow increases or slower, but it can
not be made to increase at the same rate as the air. This is due to the
nature of the flow laws of air and liquids through the various forms
of passages of such dimensions as are suitable for carburetors, and it
does not appear to be within the range of mechanical ingenuity or the
skill of designers to overcome this condition except by departing from
the simple fixed inlets or the constant fuel head, by introducing a correcting variable; in short, by providing a proper sort and amount of
com pensation.
The uncompensated cases thus eliminated from consideration for
variable speed, variable load engines, or engines in which the flow
is as much determined by engine-resting torque or speed as by
t.hrottle position includes those of subclasses 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4,
having periodic fuel valves with or without periodic air valves
that open each suction stroke, but which present fixed areas for flow
when open whether the fuel valve is operated mechanically from the
valve gear I (1.1), or is opened by the lifting of an automatic air
val ve with the fuel inlet in the sea t (1.2), or opened by the movement
of an automatic air valve in front of the fnol valve (1.3) , all with a
single air inlet, or any of these arrangements with a second independent air inlet (1.4) . There are also included in the rejected
uncompensated cases those of subclasses 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, all having
plain single fixed air and fuel inlets with r eference to area and
position, no matter how arranged, whether the fuel inlet is at a
restricted air throat (3.1), with or without air-directin~ vanes,
baffles, or guides (3.2), or provided with rotating spreadmg and
mixing surfaces (3.3). It must be understood that an air or a. fuel
inlet is fixed when its area does not change with flow; it may have
manually adjustable valves for changing a flow area, which, however, once so set remains fixed, no matter how the flow rate may
change with engine speed and throttle variations.
Designers must, therefore, concentrate attention on the problem
or compensation and develop, first, various schemes or qualitative
means of compensation and, second, apply to each of these the physical laws belonging to or characteristic of it as the quantitative and

AERONAUTICS.

443

final means of compensation to secure properly proportioning flow
carburetors correct in capacity for a gIven engine. Of course, in
every case there must be available full and complete data (a;) on
the flow laws for every kind and size of both air and fuel passage,
relating quantity to vacuum; (b) on the vacuum at every point in
an air passage where a fuel nozzle might be locat ed and i~ law of
change with air flow to fix the relation between air flow and fuel
flow through this common vacuum. Without such data, now pretty
o-encrally lacking, the amount of compensation needed can not be
hown without experimental trial, which, of course, while one means
of solution, is not a proper one, and certainly is not a means that
can be characterized u.s design.
So far, improvement of carburetors has followed almost entirely
the qualitative line, attention having been concentrated on compensating schemes almost to the exclusion of the quantitative determination of flow or proportionality laws to reduce to tabular, graphic, or
algebraic form either the amount of compensation required or the
degree of success attained with what has been provided by cut-andtry empiric methods. Now that a reasonable number of compensating means has been disclosed, anyone of which would seem to be adequate if properly applied, the time seems ripe for reducing to the
quantitatIve basis the various flow laws of each element and for the
. combination of such elements that make up a carburetor.
Compensating means for proportioning flow carburetors are of
three general types, and there are several specific classes of each
type now available. These three types are named, first, flow area;
second, fuel head; and, third, combined flow area and fuel head.
Compensation by flow area includes all those arrangements in
which either the air-flow area or the fuel-flow area, or both, is varied
with the flow rate automatically in such a way as to correct for departures from constancy of proportionality; reducing the fuel or increasing the air-flow area whenever fuel is in excess by just the right
amount to reduce the excess to zero, and the opposite when air is in
excess. This may be done by providing (a) a graduating fuel-inlet
valve in connection with a fixed-air inlet; (b) a graduating air-inlet
valve in connection with a fixed-fuel inlet; (0) graduatin~ valves on
both fuel and air inlets; (d) a multiplicity of fixed-fuel inlets coming
into action successively in connection with a similar multiplicity of
fixed-air passages; (0) a multiplicity of fixed-fuel inlets coming into
action successively in connection with a single air passage provided
with a compensating regulating valve. In all cases the flow-area
change should be directly related to and controlled by the flow rate
itself.
Compensation by fuel head includes all those arrangements in
whi ch the net fuel-flow head is changed from the value it would
h ave if the fuel nozzle were fixed at a given point in the air passage
where the vacuum is directly related to and determined by the airflow rate, and if at the same time the fuel supply were taken from a
constant-level chamber with a constant-surface pressure. This end
may be attained by (f) changing the position of a fixed area fuel
nozzle in a fixed area tapered air passage, or the position of the air
passage around the fuel nozzle, used in connection with a constant
level, constant pressure fuel-supply chamber; (g) admitting air to the

444

AERONAUTICS.

fuel passage at a point between the fuel-supply chamber and the fuel
nozzle, to reduce the vacuum there and reduce the fuel flow, used in
connection with fixed flow areas and otherwise constant fuel-supply
heads; (h) reducing the pressure in the constant-level fuel- supply
chamber, in connection with fixed flow areas; (i) combinations of
changes of nozzle position in the air passage, float-chamber pressure,
and of air admission to fuel passages. Again, it is assumed that
these changes take place automatically to vary with the flow rate.
Compensation by combined flow area and fuel head, includes all
of those arrangements in which the flow area and the fuel head vary
at the same time. This may be done by (j) associating vah-ed fuel
and air inlets, (a), (b), and (c), with head control by nozzle position
(I) mixed flow (g) i or ,,-ith float chamber pressure (h) i or with
their combinations (i) i but there are two special cases of mUltiplicity
of fixed fuel inlets coming into action successively on which the head
varies at the same time. These are (k) the single or multiple tand
pipe having fixed holes at different vertical heiO"hts above a constantlevel, constant-pressure fuel-supply chamber fiXed in an air passage,
so that increase of vacuum brings higher holes into action thereby
increasing the flow area at a point of different vacuum than that of
the lower holes; and (l) the tilting chamber with a series of fuel
holes or nozzles, the fuel head on which changes as they are depressed with reference to the constant-level, constant-pressure fuelsupply chamber, while at the same time they move in the air pa age
to regions of different vacuum due to position rather than height.
In general, only one of the simple direct means of compensation
is necessary, and there is not only no good end attained by combining
in one carburetor more than one compensation acting at the same
time, but there is danger of positive harm because one m!ly operate
in opposition to the other over a part or the whole of the flow range
~llld thereby neutralize the other, the over-all effect being no better
than if no compensation at all were provided and the structure much
more complicated. Those deyelopments that have been made by the
cut-and-try method are most likely to have double or triple compensation, because the first means being improperly worked out is found
inadequate and another is added by the experimenter without due
effort to perfect the fir t means. This is not always the case, however, and there are possibilities of structural arrangement that naturally t end to combine the different means of compensation and to produce not only the desired simple structure but suitable compensation
as well. Such cases as this are the exception rather than the rule
and should not be regarded as an argument in favor of mUltiple
compen ation which should be used only when there is a good clear
advantage to be derived thereby and when positive means are provided to prevent any possibility of interference and neutralization
of one by the other.
One excellent example of this is found in the use of an air inlet
valve with a fuel inlet valve where the fuel valye alone could provide adequate compensation. Here the air valve addition in the
automatic form provides not only a suitable and proper actuating
means for the fuel valve, but in addition it directly contributes to the
prevention of a high vacuum in the mixing chamber so undesirable

AERONAUTICS.

445

from the standpoint of maximum engine capacjty which requires
that the fuel charge have the highest possible absolute pressure.
Those subclasses that have some sort of compensation but inadequate or improper-tly applied, are judged as bad to fair, while those
in which the compensation is proper in kind are judged as fair to
good, depending on the degree to which use is made of the compensation possibilities, and finally the triple judgment is applied to those
subclasses in which the definition may include the whole range from
no compensation at all to complete and satisfactory correction of
wrong proportions.
The judgment of bad to fair is applied to the following compensated subclasses because the compensation is inadequate or wrongly
related to flow.
(A) Compensation wrongly related to flow because the throttle
is the actuating element, and throttle position is not the determining
factor in fixing the rate of flow:
1. Throttle actuates the fuel regulating valve. Subclass 11.1,
single or multiple fuel inlet with single or multiple fixed air inlet;
and subclass 12.4 single fixed fuel inlet, single air inlet with automatic yah-e.
II. Throttle actuates the air regulating valve or is itself the air
valve. Subclass 7.1, single fixed fuel inlet between single air inlet
yahe and throttle; subclass 7.2, single fixed fuel inlet in front of
single air inlet valve acting as throttle; subclass 8.1, single fixed fuel
inlet fixed primary and throttle controlled secondary air; subclass 8.3,
single fixed fuel inlet, automatic primary and throttle controlled
secondary air; subclass 8.5, single fixed fuel inlet, primary and secondary air, both throttle controlled.
III. Throttle actuates both the fuel and the air regulating valves
or, acting as the air regulating valve, actuates the fuel valve. Subclass 12.1, single fuel inlet beyond single air valve acting as throttle;
su bclass 12.2, single fuel inlet between single air valve and throttle;
subclass 12.3, single fuel inlet at or in front of air valve acting as
throttle; subclass 13.1, single fuel inlet, fixed primary and throttle
controlled secondary air; subclass 13.2, single fuel inlet, throttle controlled primary and secondary air; subclass 13.4, single fuel inlet,
fixed primary and automatic secondary air; part of subclasses 14.1
and 14.2, including all cases of throttle control.
IV. Throttle control of succession of multiple fixed fuel jets, in
single or separate air passages. Subclass 6.2, more than two fixed
fuel inlets, each in separate fixed air inlet ; subclass 9.2, more than
two fixed fuel inlets in single air passage; part of subclass 9.5, the
til ting chamber, with multiple fuel nozzles, if tilted by the throttle
or air valve, acting as throttle.
(B) Compensa tion wrongly related to flow because discontinuous.
Two point compensation instead of continuous or multiple point by
successive or alternate action of two fuel inlets, each separately adjustable for one different flow rate at the ends of the range. whether
the succession be controlled by the throttle position or the vacuum
in one or separate air passages. Subclass 5.1, one fixed main fuel
inlet and one fixed auxiliarly high-speed jet, single fixed air inlet;
subclass 5.2, one fixed main fuel inlet and one fixed auxiliary low-

446

t

ABRONAUTICS.

speed or idling jet, single fixed air inlet; subclass 6.1, double carburetor with two fixed fuel inlets in separate fixed air passages, succession controlled by throttle; subclass 6.3, double carburetor with two
fixed fuel inlets In separate fixed air passages, succession controlled
by vacuum ; subclass 9.4, one fixed main fuel inlet and one fixed
auxiliary low-speed or idling jet in single variable air passage,
vacuum or throttle succession.
The judgment of fair to good is applied to the following subclasses
becau e each provides compensation of a proper kind, which mayor
may not be adequate in degree. The several subclasses are grouped
according to the type of compensation that is the controlling one,
if two or more are provided, as is the case in some instances.
(A) Automatically varying relation of fuel nozzle to air-passage
throat. Subclass 3.4, throat moves past fixed nozzle, or nozzle moyes
in fixed throat, without changing fuel or air inlet area, movement
controlled by the vacuum corresponding to the air-flow rate.
(B) Mixed flow fuel head control by admission of air to the fuel
passage to vary the fuel flow head on the delivery side, the amount
of mixed flow and air and its compensating effect controlled by the
vacuum corresponding to the air-flow rate. Subclass 4.1, single fixed
fuel inlet, single fixed main air inlet) with auxiliary mixed flow air
inlet acting continuously perintermlttently; subclass 6.5, multiple
fixed fuel and air inlets, at least one air inlet entering at least one of
the fuel pas ages, and acting continuously or intermittently; subclass 8,6, single fixed fuel inlet, multiple variable ail' inlets, at least
one of the air inlets entering the fuel passage and acting continuously or intermittently; subclass 11.3, single or multiple fixed air
inlets, at least one of the air inlets entering at least one of the fuel
passages and acting continuously or intermittently.
(C) Float-chamber pre sure control by passing air through the
top of the float chamber to the mixing chamber to vary the fuel
flow head on the supply side, the compensating effect controlled by
the vacuum corresponding to the flow rate. Subclass 3.5, single fixed
fuel and air inlets, with small auxiliay air flow through top of float
chamber; subclass 7.5, single fixed fuel and sinO'le variable air inlets
with small auxiliary air flow through top of float chamber; subclass
12.7, single variable fuel and air inlets, with small auxiliary air flow
through top of float chamber.
(D) Fuel standpipe double control of fuel head and fuel flow area,
the head on the successive holes and the number and area of poles controlled by the vacuum corresponding to the air-flow rate. The fuel
inlets are all described a multiple fixed and associated with the
following elements: Subclass 5.3, single fixed air inlet; subclass 6.6,
multiple fixed air inlets; subclass 9.3, single variable air inlet; subclass 10.5, multiple fuel nozzles if tilted by vacuum or air flow.
(E) An inlet area, varied by regulating valve with single fixed
fuel inlet, the valve controlled by the vacuum corresponding to
air-flow rate or by the flow rate itself directly. Subclass 7.3, single
air inlet, with automatic valve, fuel entering beyond; subclass 7.4,
single air inlet, with automatic valve, fuel entering at point swept by
entering air; subclass 8.2, fixed primary and automatic valved secondary air inlets; subclass 8.4, pnmary and secondary air inlets, both
automatic valved.

AERONAUTICS.

447

(F) Air inlet area varied by regulating valve with multiple fixed
fuel inlets in one or in separate air passage, the active area of each,
and the succession of which, are controlled by a valve actuated by
the vacuum corresponding to the air flow rate or by the air flow itself
directly. Subclass 6.4, more than two fixed fuel inlets, each in a separate fuel passage and fixed except for the single automatic valve;
subclass 9.1, multiple fixed fuel inlets in single air passage brought
into action successively as the automatic valve changes the air flow
area.
eG) Fuel inlet area varied by regulating valve, with single or
multiple fixed air inlets, automatically with the air flow rate. Subclass 11.2: single fuel inlet, fuel valve actun.tf'd by the vacuum corresponding to the air fiow rate or by the air flow itself without changing the air inlet area.
(H) Fuel and air inlet areas both varied automatically with the
air flow rate, the fuel valve acutated by the automatic air valve, or
the air and fuel valves independently actuated by the vacuum cor·
responding to the air flow rate or by the air flow itself directly. Sub.
class 12.5, single fuel and air inlet, fuel valve controlled by automatic
air valve; subclass 12.6, single fuel and air inlet, the fuel inlet valve
controlled directly by the vacuum or the air flow and the air entering
through a mechanical or an air automatic valve; subclass 13.3, single
fuel valve controlled directly by the vacuum or air flow with fixed
primary and variable secondary air; subclass 13.3 single fuel inlet, fixed
primary and automatic valved secondary air actuating the fuel valve;
subclass 13.6, single fuel inlet, automatic primary and secondary air
valves, one or both controlling the fuel valve; part of subclasses 14.1,
and 14.2 including all those cases where the fuel and air control is
automatic and not by throttle.
(I) Successive point fuel-area control with regular variation of
air area automatically. Subclass 10.1, two fuel inlets, one fixed main
jet, and one fixed auxiliary high-speed jet brought into action at
high-flow rates by the vacuum or by the action of the automatic
secondary air valve, with fixed primary and automatic secondary air
inlets; subclass 10.2, t"Wo fuel inlets, one fixed main, and one fixed
auxiliary low-speed or idling jet brought into action by the vacuum
above the throttle or 'by the throttle closure, with fixed primary
and automatic secondary air inlets; subclasses 10.3 and 10.4, two or
more fuel inlets each with a separate air passage receiving all or
part of the air through an automatic valve, with or without a common automatic secondary air valve, the succession of action of the
seyeral chambers being controlled by the vacuum, respectively.
The triple judgment, or no judgment at all, applying to all the
general classes except the first, which is rejected as uncompensated,
also applies to the following subclasses, with the division and limitation noted in each case. The first of these is subclass 9.5, concerned
with fuel-head and fuel-flow area control simultaneously, somewhat
similar to the standpipe idea, but here brought into action by tilting
a multijet chamber. If the tilting be accomplished by the vacuum
or air flow automatically, then these cases belong in the fair to good
group (D) ; but, on the other hand, if, as is more often the case, the
tilting be done by the throttle or by an air valve acting as throttle,

448

AERONAUTICS.

then they fall in the bad to fair group (A).
imilarly, subclass 14.1, t wo fuel inlets, one fixed and the othf;l' with a regulating
valve for high speed in connection "ith single -or multiple variable
air, belongs with the fair to good group (H), if the fuel valve is
controlled by the yacuum or flow, eyen if the air valve is throttle
controlled, and more especially 0 if it is automatic and itself controls the fuel; whereas, on the other hand, if the fuel valve is throttle
controlled even with an automatic air Yah-e, and e pecially with a
throttle-controlled or throttle-acting air YalYe, the case belongs with
the bad to fair group (A) . Again those mUltiple carburetors each
unit of which contains a variable fuel and variable air element, and
to which may be added a common secondary air yuhe belong to
the fair to good group (H), or to the bad to fair group (A), no
matter whether the succession or progression is controlled automatically or .by the throttle, depending on the nature of the control
of the separate unit fuel and air valves, to the former if automatic,
to the latter if connected to throttle.
Assuming that by this unaly is a eries of typical forms and arrangements of compensating carburetors, classed as fair to good, involving a set of generally available compensa ting means that can be
used single, or several of which can be jointly employed to coact in a
single carburetor, provided interference and neutralization of their
influences is prevented, it is necessary to establish some basis of distinguishing the fair from the good, or more directly to specify the
elements or conditions that shall yield a good rather than merely a
fair result. This is the quantitative side of the question and generally speaking is not the sort of thing that can be put into general
language, but requires first the establishment of a large quantity of
eXJ;>erimental data on flow laws or the relation of the vacuum at a
pomt in an air passage that might be occupied by a fuel jet to the
flow law of the air passage, all reduced to algebraic or at least to
graphic and tabular form.
It is, however, possible to draw a few general conclusions of some
value as guides. In the first place, it must be pointed out that all
the different typical means of compensation that belong to the general
class of varyino- the fuel flow head from what it would be with a
fuel nozzle in a fixed position in the air passage and a constant level
fuel supply at constant surface pressure are themselves dependent
on fiow laws. Therefore, to apply such compensation as is derivable from mixed flow float chamber pressure control, and fuel standpipes, the flow laws of the uncompensated passages must not only be
known, but also the laws of flow for the compensating passages themselves. The same thing is true for the compensation by variable
relation of the fuel-jet position in the air-passage throat, because
unless the vacuum at every point of the throat is known for any flow
rate, it is impossible to determine how much movement will be
needed to compensate for the incorrect proportions that result from
a fixed position. Of cour e, as has been pointed out before, the desired result may be attained by cut and try methods, but it is more
than likely that such methods will produce only a measure of what
is possible by the scientific method, though it is possible that patience
and good luck may make data unnecessary. Of the three fixed pas-

AERON AUTICS.

449

sage compensating means, that by mixed flow is by all odds the best,
the standpipe suffering interference by inertia and requiring excessively minute orifices when the aggregate of many shall equal in
area a single one that is itself pretty small. The float chamber pressure control is next in order of promise, but is subj ect to interference
by leaks dirt, and splashing when under vibration or when tilted.
The n'ext conclu ion worthy of notice is that all these compensations by fuel-flow head control are applicable to fixed passageways
which once established need no further adjustment except as may
be required to correct for fuel and air density and fuel viscosity
changes, the function of subclasses 15.1 and 15.2, though, of course,
these can not be expected to correct for a change in the character
of the fuel when a more vi cous is substituted for a less viscous kind.
This is one limitation of the fixed fuel passage carburetor, and is
an offset to its excellent feature of nonadjustability, a matter of
greater importance the less the skill of the operator. Perhaps a
more serious drawback is the rate at which the vacuum increases and
the mixture density decrea es, with increase of flow rate, when the
air passage is one of fixed area. It is clear that if at low speeds the
air-inlet area is small enough to establish a reliably steady fluel flow,
then at the maximum flow rate corresponding to the maximum speed
and load of the engine the mixture vacuum will be quite high and
the capacity of the engine lower than it would be if the air-inlet
area increased with flow rate, other things being equal.
This is the principal argwnent in favor of the automatic valved
air inlet, which has a good deal to recommend it otherwise, and no
very serious disadvantages, if intelligently worked out. No automatic valve that requires a variable load derived from a spring, the
resistance of which varies with its distortion, can be approved, nor
can any loading linkage or cam arrangements in which wear or dirt
may affect the motion or the loading. Any possibility of this sort
means an unexpected and perhaps disastrous interference with the
compensation and, therefore, with the working of the engine. There
can be no corresponding objection to the use of automatIc air valves
that are gravity-loaded without springs or that have spring loads
that are constantr-that is, that do not vary with the entire range or
distortion permitted, a constant Joad spring being precisely equivalent to a gravity load except for the item of inertia which is less.
Another similar loading that is possible is the constant buoyancy of
a float constantly submerged in a liquid chamber. With such loading, moreover, the air valve can be relied upon for movement over
its whole range with but little, if any, change of vacuum and, therefore, becomes a means of securing a mixture at the maximum possible absolute pressure without the use of boosting fans, blowers, or
pumps.
Only such forms of automatic air valve should be used as are not
subject to sticking, a defect of this class of appliance, because the
actuating forces are feeble. Certainly the form should be S'Jch that
wear shall not interfere with the action by creating a leak path for
the air. This points to centrally guided valves of the circumferential seating form rather than to piston or sleeve forms. With such
slight vacuum as develops with a constant load automatic valve the
72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2-29

45 0

AERONAUTICS.

fuel flow required can be maintained only by the use of a fuel valve
the area through or past which must vary with that through or past
the air valve, and as such air valves are themselves equivalent to air
meters, their movement indicating directly or indirectly the air flow
vohune, this same movement seems a most logical actuating means
of the needed fuel valve. Assuming that a connection of this sort
is to be used, it must be pointed out that the relative areas can be
established experimentally with absolute precision without first
establishing the flow laws for the air and fuel passages, because the
shape of the air valve and its seat or guiding walls may be selected
and the proper form of needle established by testin~ the proportionality over the flow range and cutting the needle Or Its seat to correct
for deficiencies at any point. The inverse and easier method may,
however, be substituted, that of selecting a needle form that is easily
made with precision, and experimentally shaping the air valye or
its seat. The latter is preferable because of the larger dimensions
to be adjusted and the lesser consequence of shop error.
In thIS analysis the throttle-controlled compensations have been
rejected in favor of those that are automatically controlled by the
air-flow conditions, on the assumption that the throttle position is
not a prime variable in the rate of flow in carburetors. This is certainly justifiable in the case of engines of the automobile class where
resisting torque is widely variable, and therefore engine speed and
carburetor flow rate also under any given throttle position. It is
true to a lesser degree of engines driving screw propellers whether
they be in water or in air. If the propeller for a given engine were
to be always the same, and if it were to rotate in water or all' always
in the same state of density and of motion as to amount and direction,
then it would not be true, because the engine speed and t he carburetor
flow rate would be controlled by the throttle alone. In view, however, of the fact that propeller-rotating resistances do vary at a given
speed, especially when rotating in air, and that for a given dnving
torque the rotative speed will also vary, then the throttle position
ceases to be a prime variable, thpugh the situation is not so bad as
with the land vehicle. That carburetors can be designed to meet the
worst sort of independence of flow rate with respect to throttle position, warrants the conclusion that this sort must be approved even
for the propeller service over the others that depend for their accuracy of proportioning on the assumption that flow rate is fixed by
throttle position alone, and always will be no matter when, where, or
how used.
All variations in flow rate through a carburetor having any sort
of throttle-controlled compensation that take place at any fixed
throttle position, due to changes in resistillg torque mainly, though
to some extent also to spark angle, must affect mixture proportions
as if the throttle-actuated compensator were absent. This would
most seriously disturb those classes in which the only compensation
provided were throttle controlled, and less seriously those in which
the throttle-controlled compensator upplements another compen ator that is automatically actuated by flow conditions directly. The
result would be least serious in boat and aero engines and most in
land transportation machines, like the automobile, tractor, and railroad engines.

AERONAUTICS.

451

Even if it should be found in the case of propeller-drive engines
for aero and marine work that throttle-controlled compensators did
not seriously disturb proportionality in the carburetor, it is nevertheless advisable to use even for them those classes of carburetors having automatic compensation, controlled directly by the flow rate, unless it could be shown that more would be lost than gained by so
doing. One condition that might be cited as an example justifying
such a decision is that of sticking versus nonsticking of a moving
part, which in the preferred group of carburetors is automatically
actuated by the flow rate, but in the other is manually controlled.
Even the most perfect . carburetor from the proportionality standpoint might properly be described in favor of a less accurate instrument with a throttle-actuated compensator, if in the former case the
movement of an air valve, for example, were irregular and jerky,
until such time as improved mechanical design could remedy the
defect and insure reliability of action.

•

REPORT No. 11.
PART V.

FLOW LAWS FOR GASES AND LIQUIDS, WITH SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO AIR AND GASOLINE IN PASSAGES
FOUND IN CARBURETORS, WITH COEFFICIENTS OR
TEST DATA TO BE FOUND IN THE LITERATURE OF THE
SUBJECT.
By

CHARLES

E.

LUCKE.

(A) FORMULAE FOR THE FLOW OF FLUIDS, BASED ON HYDRAU-

LIC AND THERMODYNAMIC LAWS.

1. Flow of fluids-General conditions.-Before giving coefficients
for special cases, it seems desirable to review briefly the general laws
for the flow of gases and liquids.
The simplest case is that of a fluid, gaseous or liquid, passing
through a straight pipe of unvarying cross section. H all the particles of the fluid move in straight paths parallel to the axis of the
pipe, and with the same velocity, the quantity by volume passing
a given cross section in unit time is Q=u. A, where u is the velocity
of any particle and Lt the area of the cross section. This, however,
does not represent the actual case. Close to the wall will be a dead
layer of fluid clinging to the pipe and having no velocity. Next to
this layer will be a slowly moving layer and the velocities of these
thin layers will increase toward the center of the pipe, where the
maximum velocity is found. In general, then, if the quantity is to
be determined by velocity measurements, as, for instance, by the
use of a Pitot tube, the velocity will have to be determined at a number
of points representing equal areas and the actual mean velocity
found. In that case the equation still is Q=um • Lt, where U m is the
mean velocity. In general, however, the equation will have to beQ=

f a.du

(1)

Experience has shown that even the case in which friction is
considered does not represent actual conditions except at the very
lowest velocities, i. e., in general the individual particles do not
move in straight-line parallel paths. Instead the flow is more or
less turbulent. This is due to viscosity, which varies between the
widest limits among different fluids, and even for anyone fluid when
the temperature changes. Even in the case of the lightest gases
viscosity plays a certam part. Whenever the difference in velocity
between two adjacent layers becomes great enough, depending on
453

454

AERONAUTICS.

the kind and condition of the fluid, the two layers will actually
separate, and turbulent flow is the result.
If the cross section of the pipe or channel varies, the mean velocity
can not remain constant. For continuous flow the weight passing
any section in unit time must be constant, and if : represents this
quantity and U l l A1w1 represent the mean velocity, area, and specific
weight, respectively, at section 1, and using similar subscripts for
other sections,
W
t=A1u 1W 1 = Azuzwz=A.,.unwn
(2)
For liquids the specific weight is practically constant and the equation
simplilles to
A 1u 1 = Azu z= Anun
(2a)
Thus for liquids the areas are inversely proportional to the velocities:
and for very small pressure changes this also applies to gases and
vapors with sufficient accuracy.
2. Flow of gases-Gene1'aJ, case-Theoretical flow rate.-Not only
the weight pa sing any cross section in unit time must be constant,
but also, according to the law of the conservation of energy, the
energy per unit mass at one point of the pipe must be equal to the
energy per unit mass of the stuff at any other point in the pipe if
there is no heat interchange with the surrounding medium. This
is expressed by the equation
U 2

u2

+ 2~ = Iz+pzvz+ 2;

11 +P1V 1

(3)

Constant
in which 11 •2 = internal energy per pound of fluid
Pl.2 = static pressure in pounds per square foot abs.
V 1 • Z = specific volume in cubic feet per pound
U1. 2 = velocity in feet per second
9 = gravitational acceleration
=32.16 feet per second per second.
=

This assumes the centers of sections 1 and 2 to be on the same
level, i. e., a horizontal pipe. PI is the pressure which would be
indicated on a gauge floating in the stream. It may be determined
by drilling a hole at right angles to the wall of the pipe and attaching a manometer or gauge, but this will give the true static pressure
only at low velocities. At higher velocities the aspirating effect
lowers the readings.
Transposing

u2
2; - 2~ =11 +P1V1-12 -P2v2

U-

8SSummg adiaoatlC conditions,
11 - I 2-- P1v1 -pZv2 where n -Of}
- 0P
n-1

(3a)

455

AERONAUTICS.

substituting and simplyfying,

but,
hence,

U~ _ ui _ ~
2g

v

2 g - n - 1 PI I

[1 -

(P2) n
PI

~

1J

(4)

For continuous flow from equation (2),

W. =A u I =A2u 2=A
oeo

V2

I VI

U

2

2 VI

(p2)I/n

PI

h ence,
(5)

substituting in equation (4)

and

This equation is based on the assumption o£ non turbulent flow and
neglects heat flow through the pipe walls. When it is used £01' Venturi meter tubes, PI is the upstream pressure and P2 the pressure at
the "throat." VI is the reciprocal o£ the density at upstream pressure and n for air is 1.403.
3. Flow of gases- Theoretical flow rate for small presswre ditfere1wes.-In equation (3a) the right-hand member is an expression
o£ the work during the change from condition (Pu vJ to (P2' P2).
Graphically it is represented by the indicator card of an ideal air
engine or air compressor, with no clearance and adiabatic expansion
or compression. Now when the pressure range is very small, this
diagram becomes practically a rectangle, i. e., 1.'2 is very nearly equal
to VI so that equation (3 a), is simplified and reads,
(8)

=Pt _ P2 where w=mean density.

w

w

456

AERONAUTICS.

It can be shown that the error of this approximation is equal to
1
Pressure range f
.
if
.
.
or alT. or
the error IS not to exceed 1 per
pressure
.
2 .8
cent the pressure range must not exceed 2.8 per cent of the pres ure.
Thus for work near atmospheric pressure the pressure range must
not exceed 0.028 X 408 = 11.4 inches of water for a maximum error
of 1 per cent, or 22.8 inches if 2 per cent are allowed. It is well to
lmow exactly what error to expect when using an approximation
and not simply to speak about "small pressure drops" without
specifying.
4. Flow of gases through orifi,ces- Theoretical flow rates-General
case-Oritical pressure ratio .-"When a gas flows from a large vessel
through any kind of an orifice into the atmosphere or into another
vessel, the pressure in the vessel PI being greater than the pressure
outside, Pz, the general equations (6) and (7) of course apply, so long
as adiabatic flow is assumed, but they may be simplified, since the
term [1- (~z)z (pz )2/n becomes very nearly equal to one and may
I
be neglected. In ~~e case of the flow from the atmosphere into the carburetor, for instance ul., becomes zero and the above term does not
exist. In other cases tne error will have to be determined.
With the assumption then that U z is very large compared with U ll
equation (6) is transformed into

n-l
u=2g'n~ l'PIVI.[l-(~:)-n

(9)

where u is the velocity of efflux from the orifice and pz the pressure at
the smallest cross section of the orifice which for the present is assumed to be a hole in a thin plate or a short converging nozzle, so that
Pi is equal to the pressure of the medium into which discharge takes
p ace. The latter statement, however, is not generally true as will be
seen below.
Equation (7) takes this form:
1/n~
n-l
Wsec=A.(b.)
2g'~'PI[I_(PZ)
(10)

PI

.

n-1 VI

PI

nJ

or
(lOa)

or, for air, for a round orifice of diameter d inches, the initial temperature of the air being 60° F.

117"'0 = 0.000491

dZPI~(;:)1~25(~:)172

(lOb)

The only variable in (9) and (10) is the pressure ratio (~:); and if,
by means of graphical method or by differential calculus, the value
of pz for maximum flow is determined, the following result is obtained:

PI

G:)=(n! l)n~ 1

for maximum flow.

(11)

457

AERONAUTICS.

This is called the (J7'iticril pressure ratio. It means that if values are
calculated for W, keeping PI constant and gradually reducing P2'
the back pressure, the discharge increases until the critical pressure
ratio is reached. If the pressure is reduced still further, the flow
should begin to decrease, according to the formula, until with
P2=0 the flow would be zero. This is manifestly wrong, and many
experimental investigations have proven that after the flow rate has
r eached a maximum value it r emains constant, no matter how much
the back pressure is reduced. Or, in other "\\ords, when this critical
pressure ratio is exceeded the pressure in the mouth of the orifice is
not any more identical with the pressure outside. For air with
n= 1.40 the critical pressure ratio from equation (11) is 0.528, i. e.,
at 53 per cent of the initial pressure the flow r ate reaches its maximum value. T his, as h as been emphasized in another chapter, must
not be overlooked by carburetor designers, since, should the pressure
at the throat of the Venturi tube r each this critical value, the air
flow would cease to increase, while the gasoline flow out of a nozzle
located in the throat of the Venturi tube would continue to increase
with the pressure drop.
The expression for ma,ximum flow, substituting the critical v alue
of (~:) from (11) in equation (10) or (lOa), becomes

W.

- A (

max -

2 )

1 2 PI

n

(12)

n + 1 n - 1 g VI n + 1

5. Same conditions as for (4) - Approximating expressions for
flow rates.-Equations (9) and (10) are very awkwar d for numeri-

cal calculations. Equation (8) gives very simple expressions, but is
accurat e only for ver y small pressure ranges, as was shown there.
To satisfy the need for simpler forms for the whole r ange down
to the critical pressure, various approximations have been devised.
One is due to Schuler, who substituted a hyperbola with the exponent
unity and having its origin on the volume axis in place of the actual
adiabatic curve. This results in the following expression for the
velocity at the mouth of the orifice.
u=

.

n-l

in which 0/. = n + 1 .

/2g (PI - pz) . 2 PI -

-y

0/. (PI - pz)
(PI + P2)

WI

(13 )

1

1-(n!l)n~1
=

W=A . ~ and

0.353 for air.
V 2 =V1 •

~: [1-O/.(I-~:)J

The accuracy of this expression is as follows:
For PI = 1. 1

1. 3

1. 5

1. '!

-0.6%

-0.82%

-1.1 %

P2

Error

=0%

(14)

~---------------- ---

458

-

-

-

----------------------- -------~~---~

AERONAUTICS.

6. Flow of gases through orifices-Theoretical flow rates-Small
pressure drops.-Equation (8) which was deduced for fluids in general
may be used for gas flow as long as the pressure r ange is very small.
For the limits of aocuracy, see discussion under equation (8). When
the pressure ratio is less than P2 = 0.9, the above given accurat.e
equations (9) and (10) or (13) an~i (14) have to be used. When the
pressure ratio approaches the critical value, approximate formulre
deduced from u = .../2gh in which h = Pi - P2 are absolutely useless.
Wi

Below will be found a few enpressions based on equation (8) .
Durley (Trans. A. S. M. E., vol. 27) reduces it into this form (for
air flow):
For an orifice of diameter d inches,
(15)

in which i = difference of pressure in inches of water.
P = mean pressure of air in pounds.
T = abs. temperature of air in OF. (supposed to remain unchanged).
Durley says that "up to a pressure of about 20 inches of water above
atmospheric pressure the results of equations (15) and the accurate
formula (10) agree very closely. At higher differences of pressure
divergence becomes noticeable."
When the discharge takes place into the atmosphere, P, in Durley's
formula, is about 2,117 pounds per square foot, and
(15a)

which is of the same form as Fliegner's formuIre:

or for less than two atmospheres to atmosphere.
W.ec =0.53

'5!

when P2<0.53 Pi

(17)

1

or for more than two atmospheres to atmosphere.
In (16) and (17) the pressures are in pounds per square inch.
T= oF abs.
Clark, for small pressure differences, uses the form :
u=66.35...jh where h=pressure difference in inches of water.

(18)

459

AERONAUTICS.

(B) ACTUAL FLOW RATES FOR GASES-RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS-COEFFICIENTS FOR FORMULAS
GIVEN IN PART A, FOR GAS FLOW.

1. OoefficWnts generally necessa1'y-Reasons.-In the formulas
mentioned so far the velocity and the weight of the fluid are seen to
depend only on the pressure drop and on the flow area. Experience,
however, shows that the flow rate also is affected by the cross section
of the shape of the orifice or nozzle or channel section. And by
shape is meant not so much the shape of the transverse section,
whether circular or oval or square or rectangular, but the contours
of the longitudinal section rather. For instance, in the case of flow
from a large vessel into the atmosphere through an orifice in a thin
plate, the jet begins to form on the inside, the particles of fluid being
accelerated toward the opening. The consequence is that the area of
the cross section of the jet a short distance from the orifice is less
than that of the orifice, i. e., the jet is "contracted," and while the
theoretical velocity may actually have been developed, the weight
discharged per unit time is

W = A' . u . w where A' = J.L A and J.L < 1

If, in addition, due to the viscosity of the fluid, the velocity is also
reduced, the velocity becomes

u' =

<P

u where <p< 1

The weight discharged therefore is

W=J.L.

<p •

A . u . w.

Although tJ. and c/> owe their origin to radically different causes, they
are usually combined into one coefficient 0, so that,
O= /L.<P

and

Wactual = O.

Wtheor

o will be called the discharge coefficient. The contraction of the
stream is caused by an abrupt change in cross section, causing
eddies, and thus whenever loss of energy is to be avoided, the
change from one cross section to another is made so as not to break
up the natural stream lines of the fluid. An orifice therefore made
with a rounded entrance gives less energy loss, hence closer approximation to the theoretical formula than an orifice in a thin plate.
It does not matter much what the exact shape of the entrance portion is as long as the corners are rounded off. Even a small radius
sweep will result in a very considerable improvement over the sharp
edged entrance.
So far the remarks apply equally to liquid and gaseous fluids. In
the case of the latter , however, another phenomenon must be concidered. The conversion of kinetic energy into heat energy, due to
friction and turbulent flow, means a rise in temperature. While
for liquids which are practically incompressible, this temperature
rise does not mean anything else but the equivalent velocity loss, in
the case of gases the resulting increase of volume must be con-

460

AERONAUTICS.

sidered. The actual volume will be greater than that corresponding
to adiabatic change which was assumed in the theoretical formulre.
2. Actual flow of gases through orifices with well-rounded entmnce.-One of the first determinations for this case was made by
Zeuner. (Zeuner, Technische Thermodynamik, 1st ed., 1887, p. 220,
2d ed., 1900, p. 256.) Zeuner found for pressures greater than twice
the outside pressure, that the actual flow of air was identical with
the calculated values within the experimental limits of accuracy.
By these experiments, made in 1871, it was proven for the first time
that the discharge remained constant when the critical pressure
ratio was exceeded, thus confirming the work of De Saint-Venant.
In his later and more accurate experiments with orifices of 5, 11, and
15 mill. diameter, Zeuner found the actual discharge rates to be
slightly less than the calculated values, or,
u~O .97

u 2 , in which u

=
U2 =

actual velocity
calculated velocity

For smaller pressure drops Weisbach had obtained the same value
for the discharge coefficient, or W "'0.97 W 2 where Wand W 2 are the
actual and calculated weights discharged in unit time. Weisbach
had used short nozzles (conical converging with parallel exit and
well-rounded entrance) . (See Grashof, Hydraulik, p. 576.)
The addition of a diverging conical part to a converging nozzle
does not affect the theoretical quantity discharged, and this form of
nozzle, which is equi\alent to a so-called Venturi tube, must be expected to show the same characteristics with respect to actual flow rate
as the short nozzle excepting that the added surface will increase the
friction. It may be mentioned, in passing, that the correct taper for
the diverging part of a Venturi tube, which has reached such prominence in carburetor design, might be calculated from the pressurevolume relations in adiabatic flow so that the minimum pres ure drop
would take place, i. e., the minimum disturbance; but in the first place
the calculations would be correct for one-flow rate only, and a mean
value would have to be adopted, and, furthermore, since one of the
principal objects in introducing a Venturi tube is to produce a good
mixing effect, it would seem that the more turbulent the flow is the
better it would be for general efficiency, and that good stream lines
are not wanted at all. Nozzles have been investigated by many experimenters on account of ,their importance for steam turbines and
for air and other gases-with a view toward their use in gas turbines
and for the purpose of measuring large quantities of air such as the
discharge of air compressors. Unfortlmately, however, most of these
experiments were made for pressure ranges near or beyond the critical pressure ratio-Stodola's nozzle experiments are perhaps the best
known. (See his book, Die Dampf turbinen, Springer, Berlin.) Although most of his work referred to steam, a study of his investigations is most helpful to the understanding of some of the peculiar
phenomena in nozzle flow.
The calculation of the discharge of nozzles which have a restriction in area, i. e., convergent-divergent nozzles, is based on the smallest cross section.
A very complete investigation of the properties of nozzles for air
flow has lately been made by Thomas B. Morley, who read a paper

AERONAUTICS.

461

before the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, published in Engineering January 28, 1916. The nozzles had throat diameters between 0.193 and 0.196 inch and were made with different tapers and
different lengths, all converging-diverging and all with more or
less rounded entrance. Similarly to most of the nozzle and orifice investigations, the air was allowed to escape into the atmosphere from a
l arge closed reservoir while the time rate of change of pressure and
temperature in the reservoir was being observed. Initial pressures
from 50 to 75 pounds per square inch abs. were used, and the discharge coefficients varied between 0.95 and 0.98. The lower values
belonged to the long nozzles and for those with overrapid divergence.
The coefficients were constant for the whole pressure range.
From all the experiments which have been quoted in this section,
it follows that for orifices or nozzles with well-rounded entrance the
discharge coefficients are very nearly unity.
Sanford A . Moss (see also his article on Discharge Coefficients for
Air Flow, American Machinist, vol. 28, No. 3, p. 14) states (Journal
A . S. M. E., September, 1916) that the discharge coefficient of a weUmade Venturi tube for air is within 1 per cent of the theoretical flow.
3. Actual flow of gases through. orifices in thin plates and sharpedged orifices diverging in the direction of fiow.-Such orifices have
a very much lower discharge coefficient than the ones just mentioned,
due, of course, to the great contraction.
For orifices in thin plates (sheets) of 0.394 inch up to 0.843
diameter, Weisbach (see Grashof, Hydraulik) found discharge coefficients varying between 0.55 and 0.72. The pressure ratios ranged
from 1.05 to 1.65. The discharge coefficients increase very appreciably with increase of pressure difference, and are slightly less for
large openings than for smaller ones.
Zeuner, for a round, sharp-edged orifice, reported discharge
coefficients very nearly the same as for "'IVeisbach's at a pressure
ratio of 1.5, but after that the coefficient continued to increase even
after the critical pressure had been exceeded and at a pressure ratio
of 4.1 it was 0.83, beginning with 0.65 at 1.5 pressure ratio. This
peculiar result apparently has not been observed by anyone else,
according to Schtiler, and must be accepted with caution.
Morley included one sharp-edged orifice in his nozzle experiments.
(See above..) The orifice, 0.196-inch diameter, was made in a thin
flat disk. The sides were beveled off, but the edge was not made
sharp, a very thin cylindrical piece being left.
With the beveled side on the side of the tank, the discharge coefficient increased from 0.758 at 25 pounds per square abs. to 0.858
at 50 pounds per square abs., the back pressure being atmospheric.
This corresponds to pressure ratios of about 1.7 and 3.4, respectively,
i. e., near andi beyond the critical ratio. The higher value agrees
with Zeuner's. Moreley also reversed the disk so that the beveled
side of the orifice was on the outside, and naturally obtained lower
values, the coefficients for the same pressure range increasing from
0.73 to 0.84.
A. O. Miiller (Forschungs-Arbeiten No. 49) investi<Yated the flow
for sharp-edged orifices similar to those last mentioned, but for very
small pressure drops, about 5 to 50 mm. of water (0.2 to 2 inches).

462

AERONAUTICS.

His determinations, made with very great care, give for these conditions a discharge coefficient of 0.597, considerably more than
Zeuner. Details could not be obtained.
Frequently quoted are the coefficients which were obtained by
R. J. Durley. (Trans. A. S. M. E ., vol. 27.) The orifices were bored
in plate 0.057 inch thick. The results are given for orifices up to
6 inches diameter and for heads up to 6 inches of water. The
principal conclusions were that for small orifices the coefficient increases as the head increases, but at a lesser rate the larger the orifices
till for the 2-inch orifice it is almost constant. For orifices larger
than 2 inches it decreases as the head increases, and at a greater rate
the larger the orifice. The coefficient as the diameter of the orifice
increases and at a greater rate the higher the head. The discharge
coefficients varied between 0.59 for a 4i-inch orifice and 0.61 for
a five-sixteenths-inch orifice, at a head of 6 inches of water. At 2
inches pressure difference the variation is even less, between 0.595
and 0.607, a mean of 0.601, which is within 0.67 per cent of Muller's
figure, 0.597.
4. Actual flow of gases over poppet valves.-In 1905 Charles E .
Lucke published a paper on the pressure drop through poppet valves
(Trans. A. S. M. E., vol. 27), which is of interest on account of the
use of poppet vah-es for auxiliary air inlets. Both flat and conical
valves were investigated and the discharge coefficients are given.
Naturally they vary between rather wide limits.
5. Actual flow of gases through short tubes with sha1"P-edged entrance.-In this case contraction will occur inside the tube near the
entrance. If the tube is long enough the jet will fill the whole of
the tube some distance from the contracted part and leave the tube
with full cross section. The pressure at the point of contraction
actually falls to a value less than the final, so that the velocity at
that point is greater than the one corresponding to the over-all
pressure drop. The weight discharged is less than that due to flow
through an orifice with well-rounded entrance, but considerably
greater than in the case of plain sharp-edged orifices. The fact is
that the jet actually takes the shape of a converging-diverging nozzle
(De Laval nozzle) and if the pressure ratio is greater than the
critical pressure, the velocity of efflux may actually be greater than
that due to the drop to the critical pressure.
According to W eisbach, for a short cylindrical tube 10 mm. in
diameter WIth sharp edges the discharge coefficient for air varies
from 0.75 at 1.05 pressure-ratio to 0.82 at 1.28 ratio. Zeuner, for the
same kind of tube and 1.72 pressure-ratio, gives 0.85.
6. Actual, flow of gases through O1ifice in thin plate, but initial
velocity not negZigible.-This case is of special interest since the
construction is extensively used for measuring air flow . Ordinarily
it is not used in carburetors. It is produced by inserting in a pipe
a disk with an opening smaller than the pipe area. The contraction
is not as great as in the case of flow from a large vessel, since the
particles of air are already in motion and have to be deflected only
very little, if the reduction in area is small.
A. O. Muller (see above) found values for the coefficient of discharge to vary from 0.641 to 1.084, depending on the ratio of cross
section. The smaller the cross section the greater the loss.

463

AERONAUTICS.

E . O. Hickstein, in a paper before the American Society of Mechanical 9ngineers in December, 1915, communicated the results of
tests made by him along the same line as Miiller's, and the r esults of
the two investigations check fairly well.
7. Actual flow of ga8eS-L088 of 1
wad in pipes.-As was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, two kinds of flow may be
distinguished, viscous and turbulent flow. In the former, which is
only possible at very low velocities, the layer of fluid near to the
pipe walls sticks to the latter by adhesion and is therefore stationary.
The next layer must be pushed over the first , the third over the second, and so forth, to the center of the pipe where the velocity is a
maximum. This relative motion of the layers is resisted by what is
called the viscosity of the fluid. Thus in viscous flow the resistance
is due only to the viscosity of the fluid. When the velocity reaches
a certain limit, called the critical velocity, small disturbances, eddies,
begin to .f orm, and soon the whole stream will be in a state of
turbulence, such as is shown by the smoke issuing or "rolling"
from a stack. Since pure viscous flow is possible only at the very
lowest velocities, and since it is out of the question to devise a
theoretical formula for turbulent flow of gases, all expressions for
loss of head in pipes are empirical. But even so they can not be of a
simple nature . if they are to be generally appli?able. Any such
formula must mvolve at least the rate of flow, speCific volume of air,
pressure of air, diameter of pipe, length of pipe, and the head required to maintain the flow . Since the pressure is decreasing the
specific 'Volume is increasing, which again means acceleration. The
condition of the pipe surface r equires a separate coefficient.
The r()ughness of the surface, more or less pronounced in all unfinished parts, delays the motion of the particles of air. They bound
off and are projected laterally into the air current, causing more disturbance and requiring to be accelerated anew.
Formulre for pipe resistance of which any number exist and which
may be found in handbooks and textbooks, are usually of the form
2

d p =f2l u where d p is tho difference of pressure at the two ends of
gm
a long pipe of leno-th 1, and of hydraulic mean dept.h m (m =diameter+4), due to a flow with mean velocity u. This equation, as Prof.
Gibson (Engineering, Nov. 22, 1912) points out, only applies if the
coefficient f is varied, not only with tho physical condition of the
interior surface of the pipe, but with its diameter, with the mean
velocity of flow, with tl:ie mean pressure, and with the temperature
of the air. Prof. Gib on therefore devisrd a formula in which the
effect of these variables was expressed, and arrived at a formula of
the following form,
ptL1
d

p= K a'll

.

u'll .

d3-'11

u 2-'11
•

(OT)

'11_1

in which J{ and a are mm1erical constants; p and u are th e mean
absolute pressure and velocity in the pipe, u is the viscosity and T
the absolute temperature of the air; 0 is obtained from the equation
p v=OT; d is the pipe diameter; and n is a numerical index depending on the size and kind of pipe. Th~ author of this formula
tested it on a number of pipes for which the flow rate had been deter-

464

AERON AU'l'ICS.

mined and obtained excellent agreement. For all cases of flow
where the air is at atmospheric temperature, the drop in pressure is
given with a high degree of accuracy by
pn-,l 'tL n •

l

d p=O.0000346 6.6 n . d 3_ n

Here d and Z are in feet, and p in potmds per square inch absolute.
Tables are given for the value of n for different pipes and also corrections for tempeeatures other than 65° F.
Now, considering the nature of the carburetor problem, it is hardly
likely that formulre like the above will ever be used very much by the
designer, but there is need for establishing experimentally the laws
of flow resistance for such sections as are employed in the modern
carburetor and manifolds.
Information on the effect of bends is incomplete. Kent (Mechanical Engineer's Pocket Book, 8th ed., p. 593) gives the effect of elbows
and tees in terms of the equivalent length of straight pipe producing
the same pressure drop, but the applicability to carburetors and
manifolds is doubtful to say the least.
That empirical formulre for the flow of air through large channels,
such as ventilating ducts and smokestacks, on which a great deal
of reliable information has been collected, will be of no use in carburetor work is self-evident.
(C) ACTUAL FLOW RATES FOR LIQUIDS-RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS-COEFFICIENTS FOR FORMULAE
GIVEN IN PART A FOR FLOW OF LIQUIDS.

1. General considerations.-The general flow laws do not differ in
principle for liquids and gases, so that practically the whole of the
theoretical part of the discussion in part B applIes equally well to
liquids and need not be r epeated.
Hydraulics is one of the oldest branches of science, and naturally
there is a vast storehouse of information on everything, it would
seem, pertaining to the flow of liquids. Unfortunately, however,
practically all of this stored-up information is useless when we come
to carburetor problems, for the simple reason that the passages
which matter-those that affect the flow rate-are so small that at the
velocities used they have to be classed among capillary tubes and
passages. The other passages between float chamber and jet are simply made large enough and can easily be made large enough so that
the velocity in them is negligible.
The problem consists in controlling the fuel flow by means of the
air flow so that the proportions of air to fuel by weight is maintained
constant or varied according to some predetermined rule.
The fundamental laws for the flow of liquids are exactly the same
as those for gases, and there is no foundation for the general statement often made that in a carburetor with fixed nozzle and fixed air
inlet the mixture becomes richer, as the flow increases, because they
"do not follow the same law." The broad flow laws are the same
for both media, but they do not work under the same conditions on
account of the small dimensions of the fuel control passages, or

AERON AUTICS.

465

otherwise, the special forms of the flow laws for the particular air
and fuel passages may be different, and usually are.
Partly the dlfficulty is of course due to the circumstance that the
level of the fuel in the float chamber necessarily is lower than the
mouth of the spray nozzle, since the fuel must not overflow when
the engine is not running or when the engine is tilted. This results
in a certain lag in the fuel flow , i. e. , the air must have a certain
velocity before the fuel will begin to flow at all. This condition is
represented by the equation
u = ..j2g(h - ho)
where u=velocity of fuel, h=suction head due to the air flow, and
h=difference in level between float chamber and mouth of spray
nozzle. That this only partly accounts for the discrepancy can easily
be proven and has been proven by raising the level in the float
chamber until it is flush with the mouth of the nozzle. Even then the
fuel increases more rapidly in proportion to the air.
2. Flow of liquids th,'ough 81'fIAill orifices.-The first investigator
who attacked this problem in a thoroughgoing manner was Prof. K.
Rummel, Aachen, Germany, who conducted a series of tests covering
a period of three years, and 'published the results in Der Motorwagen
in 1906. (See translation 1Il Horseless Age, Apr. 14, 1915.) The
laws of liquid flow were known for two special conditions, viz, flow
through a relatively long capillary tube/ and through orifices in the
walls of large vessels. The carburetor nozzle represents an intermediate case. Prof. Rummel developed a mathematical theory of
the flow and substantiated his deductions by quantitative tests. Water
was used for the sake of safety and accuracy, and was perfectly satisfactory since only qualitative results were looked after.
Rummel refers to the work of Krebs, the inventor of the springloaded auxiliary air valve. (Revue Industrielle, 1903, No. 1.) Krebs
used for the fuel flow the formula,

u= ..j2g(h-h'),
and Rummel points out that this h' has to correct(a) The difference in level, as mentioned before; and
(0) Capillary frictional resistances in the nozzle which, therefore, in contrast to the general views on the subject, are assumed to
be independent of the velocity.
Krebs then finds it necessary to introduce another correction factor to allow for the pulsating flow of the engine at higher speeds.
Still Rummel objects, and correctly so, to the implied assumption
that capillary flow is independent of speed.
~oi~uille first es~ablishcd the l~w of capillary fl ow (Annales de
Chimie et de PhYSlque, 1843, senes 3, vol. 7), with the equation
py=u

~~Z7] where rr=frictional

resistance, u=velocity, l=length of

tube, d=diameter, and 'tJ=coefficient of viscosity.
Reynolds (Phil. Trans., London, 1883, A 174, p. 935) was the first
to determine the critical velocity where turbulent flow begins and
1

Sec values given by Sorel.

72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2-30

466

AERONAUTICS.

which was explained before. Above the critical velocity, Reynolds
found the friction to vary as the 1.7 power of the velocity, but the
values of u in carburetors lie uniformly below Reynold's critical
velocity, therefore Poiseuville's law is valid. Unfortunately, even
this law is not absolutely correct for short tubes like carburetor nozzles, and a correction is necessary.
Taking all these factors into consideration, Rummel deduces a
theoretical equation which shows that a variation of the mixture
proportions must actually occur unless additional air is admitted.
The form of this equation is,
PI'=c1U+C ZU 2 •

The experiments subsequently made on nozzles of various kinds
substantiated the correctness of the form of the equation. Prof.
Rummel draws some very interesting deductions from the values
obtained by him, but no useful purpose would be served in quoting these in this place. Assuming the form of his expression for thc
flow rate to be correct, nothing would be left but to find by experiment the proper coefficients for nozzles of different kinds, and the
scientific basis for carburetor design as far as proportioning is concerned would be established. Now Rummel's in,estigations were
published in 1906 and since then, especially in the last four or five
years, very important work in this field of re earch has been done,
and even if the general form of his equation is found to be not generally applicable, to Rummel belongs the great distinction of having
once for all shown that no headway can be made in discovering the
" mystery" of carburetor nozzle flow as long as investigators do not
get away from the ...)2gh law which simply does not apply. In spite
of Rummel's work, however, and all that has followed, the impossible attempt is still persisted in, as the carburetor literature
plainly shows.
The results which have been accomplished in the last :few years
are very well summarized by Dr. Charles H. L ees in the introduction of an article on "Laws of skin friction" (Engineering, June
2, 1916), which deals, not with carburetors, but with the resistance
experienced by ships. This only illustrates the significance of the
fact that the study of viscosity has helped to throw light on many
problems which hitherto have resisted all attempts at rational solution.
Dr. Lees's summary is herewith given verbatim :
On the frictional resistance to the flow of fluids through pipe.s.
When a fluid of dem;ity p flows through a length l of a smooth
pipe of diameter a with a mean speed over the section of the tube
of v, not sufficiently large to cause the motion of the fluid to deviate
from stream-line motion, the frictional resistance F to its motion
is given according to Stokes by :
F=87r'r/ l v
where '1J is the viscosity of the fluid. When the speed of the fluid is
increased above a certain value, called by Reynolds the" criticnl
velocity" for that fluid and pipe, the :frictional resistance increases

AERONAUTICS.

467

faster than the first power of the velocity, and at high speeds becomes nearly proportional to the square of the mean velocity. We
propose to call the motion under the first law" stream-line motion,"
and when deviation from this law commences to call the motion
"eddying or turbulent motion."
The experimental results obtained by Stanton and Pannell at the
National Physical Laboratory in the turbulent flow of water and
other fluids through smooth brass pipes of diHmeters 0.3 to 12 cm.
at speeds from 5 to 5,000 cm. per second, and those obtained by Saph
and Schoder at Cornell University on water in pipes from 0.3 to 5
cm. diameter, have been shown recently to lead to the following
simple formula for the total frictional resistance F of a smooth pipe
of length l, diameter d, through which a fluid of kinematical viscoscity i is flowing with mean speed v :

where A is the area of the surface of the length of pipe, a=0.0009,
b=0.0765, n=0.35, whatever be the fluid or the system of units used.
From the form of this expression it will be seen that for all mean
velocities above the critical, for which

dv
- =3000 about
v

the resistance over small ranges of velocity will vary approximately
as a power of the velocity between 1.65 and 2.0 and that, as the
diameter of the pipe increases, or the speed increases, or the kinematical viscoscity decreases, the resistance will vary more nearly
as the square of the velocity.
The single power of the velocity which gives the best approximation
in the neighborhood, of a particular value of d v is:
v

1+ (1 - ~)!!(.l)
2 a d.v
nl=2.

b('Y)?l

1+- a d.v

The references quoted by Dr. Lees are the following: Stanton and
Pannell (Phil. Trans. Royal Society, A, vol. 114, p. 199, 1914);
Saph and Schoder (American Society of Civil Engineers' Proceedings, vol. 51, p. 253, 1903) ; Lees (Roy. Soc. Proc., A, vol. 91, p. 49,
1914). Recently Lander has shown that with a=0.002, b=0.141,
n=O.44, the formula covers his measurements on the flow of water
and steam through small rough, wrought-iron pipes. (Roy. Soc.
Proc., A, vol. 92, 1916.)
It would seem advisable to follow Dr. Lees's practice, and name
all flow below Reynold's "critical velocity" simply "stream line
motion" and above this velocity "turbulent flow." There is also
the danger that the designation "capillary tube" and "capillary

-

468

--

----------------------------------------------~

ABRON AUTICS.

flow," which are so glibly used in the carburetor literature, are misunderstood. Since not small dimensions, but dimensions cr:nit velocity
together with the viscosity of the fluid determine whether the formulre for stream line flow or those for turbulent flow should be applied, the title" capillary tube" seems to have no significance whatever, as far as flow is concerned.
The form of equation given by Lees differs from Rummel's formula
inasmuch as the second term does not contain the first power of the
velocity, but the 1.65 power. It must, however, be noted that Rummel used tubes of 0.0375 cm. up to 0.0720 cm. diameter and variou!:;
lengths while Stanton and Pannell employed smooth brass pipes of
diameters 0.3 to 12 cm. and Saph and Schoder pipes of 0.3 to 5 cm.
diameter.
That the laws of stream line flow, as :formulated by Stanton and
Pannell, hold for larger pipes, was established by the most interesting
and i.ru;tructive investigation of " Viscosity of oil in relation to its rate
of flow through pipes," by Dr. R. T . Glazebrook and Messrs. W . F.
Higgins and J . R. Pannell, who presented the results before the Institution of Petroleum Technolocrists in ovember,1915. (See Engineering, Nov. 19, 1915.) The object of the research was to investigate the laws of flow of the oil in drawn-steel pipes of 3 to 5 inches
diameter with a view to determining how far the pressure difference
required to produce a given flow could be calculated from a knowledge of the pipe dimensions and the viscosity of the oil. As had been
expected it was found that the ordinary loss of viscous flow (stream
line flow) occurred as long as the velocity of flow was less than the
critical velocity. The latter is given by Dr. Glazebrook as
fl V d/'o=2,500, where

V = velocity of flow in feet per second,
d=diameter of the })ipe in feet
p=density of the 011
'tl= viscosity coefficient of the oil,
expressed in foot- pounds-second units (not in dynes per square centimeter, as is usually done). Interesting in this paper are also the
determination of the physical constants of the oils and peculiar characteristics of some of the oils.
Now that the way has been shown, the procedure should be to
analyze the various determinations of flow rates which have been
published, in the light of what is now known about viscous or streamline flow, to make new determinations for all kinds of nozzles and
channels, to fix the value of the viscosity coefficient for all fluids in
use, and to standardize the method of determining and expressing
the viscosity coefficient.
Such work, for instance, as Mr. Robert W . A . Brewer has done,
and an account of which may be found in Carburetion, by R. W. A.
Brewer, D. Appleton & Co., and in a number of periodical articles,
is extremely valuable no doubt, but as long as the many experiments
which Mr. Brewer has made are only used to furnish coefficients for
a formula of the form Q=O. A . ..j2gh, not much is gained. Brewer
himself says that this coefficient of discharge applies only to a portion
of the curve plotted with fuel discharge as ordinates and air velocities
as abscissre.

AERONAUTICS.

469

Brewer shows by actual test results that in the case of the roundhole orifice the fuel flow tends to increase too rapidly, while for an
annular orifice such as is produced by a metering Rin, the fuel flow
lags behind. He tried, therefore, to devise an orifice which would
balance the two against each other by combining the two actions in
one orifice and one metering ~in, the latter being of a special shape.
Brewer's methods" for designmg" a carburetor are, after all, nothing
but cut-and-try methods, and that is exactly what should not have
to be done.
It was hoped that it would be possible to analyze some of the lastnamed investigations, as well as others published, but unfortunately
time did not permit.

REPORT No. 11.
PART VI.

NEW EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATIONS OF THE PRO·
PORTIONING ACCURACY OF A SELECTED NUMBER OF
TYPICAL AMERICAN COMMERCIAL CARBURETORS UN·
DER VARIATIONS OF FLOW CONDITIONS.
By

CHAllLES

E.

LUCKE.

(A) NEW TEST RESULTS ON CARBURETOR PROPORTIONALITY.

The primary purpose of these tests was to determine the ratio of
air to gasoline maintained by fairly representative modern carburetors under all conditions likely to arise in practical use and thus
to determine their flow characteristics and accuracy of compensation
at all flow rates. Since it was neither feasible nor necessary for this
purpose to test all existing carburetors, a set of 10 representative
type forms was selected, and it must be distinctly understood that
the carburetors which were tested were not chosen because they were
regarded as the best carburetors in the market, but merely because
each one is well mown, more or less widely used, and represents a
distinct type of construction. The results obtained must be judged
as typical of the class and not of the individual make only. Every
known method for testing carburetors has been considered or actually
tried out in the laboratory of the mechanical engineering department of Columbia University, but for one reason or another none has
been found satisfactory but the method which suggests itself first,
namely, to attach the carburetor to an engine. Running the engine,
however, and absorbinO" the power by some form of dynamometer
makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to maintain constant
conditions for each run and to have these conditions the same for
each type of carburetor. Since proportionality only was to be investigated and the problem, therefore, consisted in measuring the gasoline and the air under various flow conditions, the engine with open
ignition circuit was driven by an electric dynamometer motor so
that the speed could be maintained at any desired value with very
great accuracy. In other words, the engine was used as a pump or
exhauster only, but with the advantage over a blower or ejector type
of exhauster that the conditions in the carburetor were exactly the
same as they would be with the engine running on its own power,
and any accidental backfiring could take place WIthout danger.
The engine used for the tests was an eight-cylinder Curtiss model
Ox aeroplane engine, and the dynamometer, driving the engine, a
150 horsepower Sprague electric dynamometer, with switchboard and
resistances as regularly supplied. The engine mounting and its con471

472

ABRON A UTICS.

Jlrral1!".,rhf of' Apparqtll"
for

k5tl"J CarlJUI'.to"3
tlKhlTIf,"cal E"!J("'~"""5 L ##b",..a(or}f
CD/V,"/"I:I l/"''''~.Iitl'
N~w Yt,r)(.

FIG. I.

s. Doc. 559,

64-2.

.--

-

---

S. Doc. 559, M--2.

-

- --

- -- --

-

-

-

- - --

-

-

- - - -

AERONAUTICS.

473

nections, as arranged for the tests, are illustrated in the diagram,
figure 1, and in the three photographs, figures 2, 3, and 4.
The mixture discharged from the engine was burned in a crudely
constructp,d surface combustion furnace, the mixture pressure in the
exhaust line being regulated to the required value by means of burner
valves of different sizes, so as to maintain sufficient mixture speed
in the nozzles to prevent back flashing. This was considered the
safest method under the circumstances and proved quite convenient
and satisfactory in use. At the same time, by observing the nature
of the fiame a great deal of time was saved in the adjustment of the
carburetor, because with a little experience the mixture quality can
be judged approximately by the flame size and color.
The carburetor to be tested was placed wholly within a specially
constructed tight wooden box, 34 by 12 by 21 inches, serving as an air
reservoir, in which the pressure could be maintained at any desired
value, and was kept at one atmosphere while air was supplied by a
blower through meters. The inside of the box was illuminated by an
incandescent lamp, and through a window the carburetor and the
fuel level gauge glass on the float chamber could be plainly seen. A
handhole and cover were provided for changing carburetors and for
adjustments. The throttle could be operated and fixed in position
without opening the box by means of lever rods, and a spindle passing
through a stuffing box with an indicator and dial on the outside of the
box. Every effort was made to have the box absolutely air-tight,
but, in any case, since during the present tests the pressure inside the
box was maintained at atmospheric pressure within one-tenth of 1
inch of water the absence of any appreciable leakage was absolutely
assured.
The gasoline was supplied from a can standing on platform scales,
the latter reading to one-thousandth of a pound, and by means of
flexible tubing conducted to the carburetor inside the box. The time
required to consume a given weight of fuel was read on a stop watc"h.
The air passed through a Root blower, driven by an electric motor,
to one of four Venturi tubes, 4 by 1 inch, 3 by i inch, 2 by t inch, and 1
by i inch, respectively, which were fixed between two headers, valves
at the upstream ends shutting off all tubes except the one suitable
for the particular condition of each run. By manipulating a slide
on the intake of the blower and a by-pass valve on the discharge side
the pressure in the box was easily maintained at the desired value.
The upstream pressure as well as the drop between upstream and
throat were read on water manometers about 4 feet high, which are
plainly visible in the illustrations.
The Venturi tubes were constructed for the purpose by the Good
Inventions Co., of Brooklyn, N. Y., and every possible precaution
taken to have them perfect. After the readings for gasoline weight
and air fiow were taken, the quantities of air and fuel per minute
were calculated immediately. To simplify the calculations for the
quantity of air from the Venturi tube manometer readings a straight
line diagram (fig. 5) was prepared, which enabled the result
to be read off directly. The formula on which the diagram is based is
given on the same sheet, and the use of the diagram is indicated
by the dotted lines.
The tests fulfilled ill every ,vay and even surpassed the expectations with respect to the USe of Venturi tubes as meters for air meas-

474

AERONAUTICS.

~

dt.
.

~

,

v'/*,7~wrr/

,

. I

n

H

~~~,

,

~

, i~\~~.
~

'1...
~

,

~ ~ ~

::,;:

.

•

'!

,-

I

~ ~,~ ~ ~ .~. ~ ~

,

~

JIV'_,1r.,l/l:/1 .f'/P''H.,ItT

k , /''''

\

.~ ~~

~

~' ~~

~

\i .\

~~ ! .~

"

\~ ~ ~

\,

~

~

,"

~ i~ ~
.. ~

~ 'I ~
~\O
~ ~ ~
\. '\

~

~,

~ A:!IA:

x~ ~

~~ , .\~
~
~
t ~~ ~

i

\

~ ~

\

~

.:;~

'" ~

t~{~

~~~ ~

~~ ~ ~
q'1i~

~~~~

~

.t

.~

I

: II:

I
I

,

"

I

I'

,
,

,

I

I

I,

"
li'l , I I
:l11~ I I i ,
,
, Illi , ,
,
, ,
, I
, , ,
"
,
",
,
, II I I
"

"
I

~

~

I

I,
,

.'

'

II

I

"
I

I

I

:: I:

,
,,
, I

, ..
", ,
",
, ,,
,
III :'1 , , ''
, ,
',
'
,: " , : , ,
"
,
, , ,,
,
"
,, ,
, ,
:i , : : I
,: , : ' ,
',
:'
, J
(

I,

II
Fi g, 5.

~

"

I

\

.

"

r

.I

I

,

,
,, i
:
, ,
, ,
I
:: ,
, ,
,,
, , ,
, , ,

I

,

~

, ,
,
,
,,
,

,
,

I

lif ,
Iii, ,
I
, I
,
, I

,
,
,
,
,
,
,
I

I
I

,
,

A'!1RONAUTICS.

475

urement. No more convenient method could be desired as long as
sudden fluctuation need not be dealt with, and the results confirm
the claim that in a properly designed and carefully constructed Venturi tube the total pressure drop is in practically all cases negligible.
The readings show (see column marked" Pressure at inlet to Venturi," which gives the total pressure drop, the downstream pressure
being atmospheric) that the loss in pressure varies between onefourth and one-sixth, the drop :from upstream to throat. Therefore, 75 to 85 per cent of the pressure drop at the throat is regained
in the diverging part of the tube at the end. Even with an ordinary
manometer pressure may easily be read within one-tenth of an inch
of water, so that the over-all pressure drop need not be more than,
say, 2 inches of water for sufficient accuracy, generally a negligible
drop. If a differential manometer be used, even a lower value for
the minimum drop will be satisfactory. Time for a strict calibration of the Venturi tubes was not available in the short period allowed for the work, but since all authorities agree that the velocity
coefficient is very nearly unity (in no case less than 0.99 for a properly constructed tube) and is constant, calibration was considered
unnecessary for the purpose of these tests. That the tubes are properly constructed is proven by the very small over-all pressure drop.
(See remarks by Sanford A . Moss, Jour. A. M. I. E., Sept., 1916,
p.720.)
The use of Venturi tubes for the measurement of the air supplied
to the carburetor of course precluded tests intended to bring out
the behavior of the carburetor when the flow suddenly increases or
decreases. No method for measuring air would seem to be applicable under these conditions, and the quality of the mixture must
be judged by the behavior of the engine running on its own power.
Bailie plates in the box served to break up the velocity of the air.
The carburetor was connected to the inlet manifolds by a flexible
metallic hose.
For each run the speed of the dynamometer and engine was regulated, then the pressure in the box was brought to atmospheric, and
the following readings were taken:
(1) Upstream pressure of Venturi.
(2) Drop between upstream and throat of Venturi.
(3) Pressure in carburetor box (atmospheric).
(4) Pressure at outlet of carburetor or mixture pressure in manifold intake by mercury manometer.
(5) Temperature in carburetor box.
(6) Temperature of mixture at outlet of carburetor.
(7) Engine speed (not necessarily very accurate as long as speed
was kept constant) .
(8) Weight of gasoline, and time consumed.
(9) Scale on gauge glass of float chamber, which was specially attached to each carburetor so as to make possible a measurement of
the level of the gasoline and to observe its fluctuations.
(10) Pressure in exhaust pipe of engine, taken only for the purpose of regulating back pressure.
(11) Barometer reading.
These readings for the several runs are recorded in the log sheets,
Tables II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII.

476

AERONAUTIC S.

T ABLE

II-VIII. - Log Of carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August, 1916.
CARBURETOR NO. !.
[June 27,1916; average barometer, 29.84 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.7275. J

._'"

~.,

Venturi meter.

.d

0

.

~~

..

~

.",
~.,

"""
I'l'"
.,.-

~"

>
~

- <08
"

,,~

"
.s -.g ""gj .s::l.Qk ~~~
...g .."S
§ g- 4) .9 -.9 -"," ~"'g'
.... . .
;n ....
~
~
~
Z

cP .... ;:

I

~.9
I'la

::s

*'
:s

."

Tempera-

1
1
1

1
l

i

8

4

9

11.5
11.6
8.2
20.0
14.0
21. 5
19.8
11.8
14.3

15.9
16.0
12.3
21. 2
14.8
19.7
18.3
12.5
15. 5

27. 4
27.6
20.5
41. 2
28.8
41. 2
38.1
24.3
30.3

~

4.0
4.0
2.5
7.4
3.8
7.8
7.3
5.0
5.8

0

Po<

Po<

~

.12
8.19
7.15
5.50
4.69
2. 84
2.75
4.37
4. 78

0.630
.627
.562
.445

.383

. 260
. 250
.360
.410

~

12.90
13. 10
12.70
12. 35
12.25
10.95
11.00
12.15
11. 65

..

I'l
'"

I'l

>i ture, OF.

.~

.0

0"

0

g.,....

I'l

~'El

§

0

~gj
... .g
:iI.s

~~.:..9 2~
~L..3 Q
~.5
~~

e ::;

~~8 ~

p':;
Po<
- - - - - - - - - - - - -"- - - -

-- 2
3
4
5
6
7

~

...

2.10
2.10
2. 60
1. 60
1. 40
0. 85
1.80
3.50
4.50

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

~.o

.. .
~~~

~8e

co.. ::3~.5

H~ 0

~s
~.9
...a
.,~

.~~

·S

~

0
~z

::3
0

8m

.8.s

"
",.9

~ '§

""1l

:i
.,a

><11

.,.<::

c
f=1

II

1,000
1,000
800
600
510
320
320
510

Full. 0. 75
Full. . 88

E-<

.... "

a"

§ ...

g,~

-g ~

~~

-- - -- --- - -

-

82
84
84
4

85
86

87
86
86

55

56
56
56
57
58.5
58
59
58

Full. 1.00
Full. 1. 15
Full. 1.25
Full. 1.35
2 1. 40
2 1.20
2 1. 15

8.75
8. 82
7.71
5.95
5.07
3.10
3.00
4. 73
5. 19

800
2 1.15
1,000
2
. 95
1,200
2
. 95
1,200 Full. .95
950
3 1. 50
810
3 1. 50
605
3 1. 50
450
3 1. 50
290
3 1. 50
1,200
3 1. 50
1,200
4 1. 50
1,000
4 1. 45
800
4 1.50
600
4 1.50
430
4 1. 50
280
4 1.50
1,200
5 1. 30
1,000
5 ......
800
5 1. 25
600
5 1. 40
420
5 1.40
210
5 1. 60

6.04
6. ll
6. 08
8.10
1.18
1.18
1.15
1. 12
1.06
1. 05
2. 55
2.54
2. 62
2.63
2.71
2.22
4.82
4.96
4. 82
4.01
3.4!
1. 96

600

CARB URETOR NO.2.
[June 28, 1916; average harometer, 29.78 inches. J
10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

1

l
i

1

t

t
t
t

,
,
,
t
t
t
t

!
i
1

i

1

20.9
21. 5
21. 2
9. 5
3. 4
3.5
3.2
3.1
2.7
2.7
19.8
10.9
21. 4
22.0
24.1
15.0
12.5
13.6
12.8
8.5
5.8
11. 3

22.3
22.8
22.3
13.3
3.5
3.4
3.2
3.1
2.7
2.7
17.7
17. 3
18.6
18.8
19.6
12.3
13.3
14.3
13.0
8.3
6.2
9.4

43.2
44.3
43.5
22.8
6.9
6.9
6.4
6.2
5.4
5.4
37.5
37.2
40. 0
40.8
43. 7
27.3
25.8
27.9
25.8
16.8
12.0
20.7

8.5 5.60
7.8 5.65
7.8 5.60
2.8 7.50
2.0 }.06
2.4 1.06
2. 2 1.04
2.3 1. 01
.95
1.8
.95
2.0
7.2 2. 32
7.3 2.32
7.8 2.40
8.5 2.41
8.5 2.49
5. 8 2.03
5. 3 4.45
6. 0 4.60
5.0 4.45
3.8 3.69
2.8 3.10
4.3 1.79

0.442
.458
. 478

. 600

. 118
. 115
. 11 2
.112
.100
. 102
. 225

.215
.222

.219
.220
.187
.365
.382
. 372
.318
.282
. 171

12. 7
12.3
11. 7
12.5
9. 0
9.2
9.3
9.04

.74

9.3
10.3
10.3
10.8
11.0
11. 3
10.9
12.1
12.1
12.0
11. 6
11.1
10.5

5.9
6.1
6. 1
2.6
13.1
14.0
14.6
14.1
ll.8
I!. 6
7.3
8.2
9.2
9.7
7.5

0 84
4
0
0 84
0 85
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 94
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 92
0 . . ..
0 91
0 91
0 91
0 92
0 . ...
0 93

. . _-.- .

8.4
8.6
8. 6
6.2

--_ ....
1.5

CARBURETOR NO.

56
55
56
56
56
55
56
57
58. 5
60
60
64
64
66
66
......

68
68

68
68
......

70

a.

[June 30,1916; average barometer, 29.93 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.7275.J
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
5~

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

t
t
i
i
i
i
t
i

!
,
,
,

11.0
11.2
12.3
12.8
12.0
11.6
9.8
5.0
12. 5
5. 6
1.2
5.9
6.0
6.3
1.0
4.8
4.8
4. 6
24.4
27.0
27.0

15. 2
15. 4
16.6
17.0
16. 3
15.9
13.8
8.5
12. 4
5.4
10.2
15.7
15. 8
15.8
10.0
14.3
14.2
14. 1
20.0
21.9
21. 9

26.2
26.6
28.9
29.8
28.3
27. 5
23.6
13.0
24.9
11.0
11. 4
21. 6
22.1
22.1
11.0
19.1
19.0
20.7
44.4
4 .9
48.9

4.3
4. 5
4.a
4.7
4.8
4.7
4.0
2. 2
4. 0
2.5
3.9
6.9
7.0
7. 0
4. 8
5.8
5.8
5.8
8.5
9.3
9.3

7.93
8. 00
8. 30
8.42
8.25
8.11
7. 56
5.73
4.40

a:~
.38
.38
.38
.20
.36

:~~

2.50
2.60
2. 60

0.500
.565
.562
.557
.538
. 518
.471
.378
.317
.225

. Oa6
.032
.035
.035
.034
.033
.034
.034
.204
.209

. 210

15.9
1. 60
14.2
1.50
14.8
1. 60
15. 1
1. 50
1. 40
15.3
15.6
1. 30
1.20
16.1
15.2
.95
13.9
.95
13. 3
.70
13.70
7.9
I!. 7
15.20
10.9 . __ ....
10.9 .......
8.05 15.10
10.8
14.60
10.7
13.30
13.70
11.1
12. 3
9.00
12.4
8.50
12.4
9.20

0 86
0 86
0 88
0 84
0 84
0 84
0 85
0 86
0 86
0 88
0 92
0 94
0 95
0 96
0 101
0 94
0 96
0 97
0 90
0 90
0 90

66
66

62
58
58
57
57
57
57
58
60
60
60
62
70
64
65
65
58
58
57

900

800
1,200
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
470
310
210
345
520
650
800
1,000
1, 200
1,400
1,400
1,200
1,000

Full.
Full.
Full.
Full .
Full.
Full.
Full.
Full.
Full.
Ful l.
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3

2.60
2. "0
2,50
2.50
2.50
2.60
2. 60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.70
2.70
2. 60
2.60
2. 60

8. 43
8.5 7
8. 86
8. 98
8. 79
8. 63
9.03
6. 11
4.7 2
3.23
. 32
.4 1
.4 1
.4 2
.3 1
.39
.3 9
.4 1
2.7o
2.31
2. 8 1

S. Doc. 559, 64-2.

477

AERON AUTICS .

1916II-VIII. - L og Of carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August,
Continu ed.

TABLE

CARBUR ETOR NO.3-Co ntinued.
'- gj

.

.g

z
§

p::

~~

.S

0

--5

,
t
t
t

i
i

,
1
t
t

1
1
1
1

t

8
2
1

.

~

:
. I''''

~

gi

.Q
t:.o,.Q

~'"

..cl.,d

~

tID(.}~

"'.S ·~.a .;.~ ~
.~ ..:I
~
p::
ffJ

-- 53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

5.s
;>

- -1 27.3 22.2
27.5 22. 6
20.3 16.6
8. 4
11.1
3.7
4. 1
7.1
7.3
14.0 14.2
8.3 19.2
16.5 16. 8
19. 1 19. 8
19.7 20.5
8.7 12.5
8.3 11.8
8.3 11.7
7.3 10.6
21.4 15.3
5.8
12.5
26.3 24.2
8.3 U. 8

"'..,

"
'GiS

~.g

~ '§

"
0 0
..

'O~."

~~3

3~c.>

0
p

{3 -e ~
ll<

<0

0

Il<

"as

",,,
- .0

~

14.4

28. 2
37. 5
33.3
38.9
40.2
21.2
20. 1
20.0
li.9
36.7
19.3
50. 5
20. 1

9. 0
9.2
7.2
4.2
1. 8
3.0
5.7
6. 0
6. 1
7.3
7.6
3.7
3.2
3. 4
3.4
6.8
3.9
9. 8
3.5

2.61 0.210
. 203
2.63
. 190
2. 32
.146
1. 74
.194
2.54
.259
3.42
. 321
4. 62
. 356
5.29
. 319
4.99
. 405
5.35
.366
0.48
. 444
7. 25
. 500
7.00
. 447
7.00
.424
6. 68
. 367
5.20
. 282
3. 91
.227
2. 57
. 510
7. 00

12.4
13. 0
12. 2
12. 0
13.1
13.2
14.4
14. 8
15.6
13. 2
16.0
16.3
14.0
15.7
15. 7
14. 2
13.5
11. 3
13.7

10. 10
9. 70
7.10
4. 20
1. 50
2.30
3. 80
5. 60 .
5. 20
6.40
6.20
3.40
3.70
3.40
3.30
2. 00
1. 20
1. 00
3.75

~8"

0::'"

E
0

'ei,A

P'I

'~i

o::.S

~§
§"

'ol.

c.>

0

~$

",Z

::I

.,s 8. ill.
>"

.a
E-<

.,0<::

..:I

c.>

:s~
0 ...
E-<

-------- - -

-

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

,gil

.§

~

;j~E a

.. ::> ~
P-I HfS 0

- - - - -- - - - -- - - 0
49.5
50.1
36. 9
18.6
7. 8

:g ~

---e'§
.~ S~
3 ~e !5~ "'''

.0
•

..

g
0::1

0

p::

§

Il<

Tempera,.

,.; ture, OF .

"'.S•
0.

.. ::0

::I

~!~ ~'@
::0
~.~~ 0

Il<

"'gj

"
2t
"'.
<oS

~

3-5

Venturi meter .

90
89
89
90
89
89
88
88
88
88
88
88
88
88
88
88
89
89
88

3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4

800
57
600
57
400
59
250
61
275
62
400
60
600
60
800
50
60 1, 000
58 1,200
59 1,400
60 1,410
59 1,200
60 1,000
800
60
600
60
400
60
300
60
59 1, 200

4

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2.60
2. 60
2. 60
2. 50
2.50
2. 50
2. 60
2.50
2. 50
2.50
2.50
2.50
2.60
2.50

2.82
2.83
2. 51
1. 89
2.73
3. 68
4.94
5.65
5.31
5.76
5.85
7.69
7.50
7.46
7.10
5. 57
3.09
2.80
7.51

-

CARD U RETOR No.4.
0.7275.)
[July 1, 1916; average barometer , 29.86 inches; gasoline, S. 0 .,

72

73

74
75
76
77
78

9.8 13.5
5. 9
13.0
24.3 18. 1
.8 12. 3
9. 7 13.4
9. 6 13. 2
9. 7 13.4

1

t
t

1
1
1
1

23.3
18.9
42. 4
21.1
23.1
22.8
23.1

7. 55
. .. ... 3. 6
... 5.55
...
. . ... . 7. 22
...... 7.52
. . .... 7. 50
... ... 7.52
. . . . ..

0.490
. 240
. 340
. 460
. 485
.485
.485

13.4
16.1
16.3
15.7
15.5
15.5
15.5

2. 60
. 70
1. 20
2.30
2. 60
2.60
2.65

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

84
86
85
85
85
86
86

1, 000
410
600
800
1, 000
1,200
1,400

56
59
58
58
58
58
58

1. 70
1. 60
1. ·j5
1. 40
1. 35
1.35

8.04
4.10
5.89
7.70
8.01
7. 99
8. 01

1. 80
1.80
1.80
1.80
1. 80
1. 75
1. 70
1. 65
1. 70
1. 70
1. 70
1. 70
1. 75
1.65
1.65
1. 65
1.65
1. 65
1.65
1. 50
1.50
1.50
1. 50
1.60
1. 6C

1.25
1.08
1.00
1. 03
1. 03
1.03
2.26
2. 27
2.27
2.27
2. 15
1.97
1.83
4.04
4. 13
4.20
4.02
3.32
2.81
6.09
6.06
5. 95
5.19
3.87
2.00

FuJI. 1. 50
Full.
Full.
Full.
Full.
Full.
Full.

[July 3, 1916; average barometer , 29.49 inches.]
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103

~

1
~

!

~
~

;
;
!
;
;
;
t
t
t
t

t
t
t

t
f
;

3.1
3. 6
1. 8
2.1
2. 1
2. 1
14.9
15.5
15.4
15.2
13.6
10. 8
9.7
13.0
13. 3
13.3
12.5
10· 0
8.2
26.7
26.4
25.3
20.0
12.2
22.5

1.6
2.1
3. 6
3.8
3.8
3.8
14.8
15.3
15.3
15.5
13. 8
11.4
9.5
5.2
5.4
5.9
4.6
2.1
0.2
20.0
19. 6
18. 5
12. 7
4.4
21.2

7. 7
5. 7
5.4
5.9
5. 9
5. 9
29.7
30. 8
30. 7
30. 7
27.4
22.2
19. 2
18. 2
18. 7
19. 7
17. 1
12.1
8.4
46. 7
46.0
43.8
32. 7
16. 6
43.7

It.

19
2. 2
1.9 1.03
1.5 .95
1.7 .98
1.6 .98
1.6 . 98
6. 2 2.12
6.4 2.13
6.2 2.13
6. 2 2. 13
5.5 2.02
5.0 1.84
4.4 1. 73
3. 8 3. 81
3.6 3. 90
3.5 3.97
3. 4 3.71
2.6 3. 13
1.9 2.64
8.6 5. 75
9.0 5.70
8.0 5.60
6.4 4.90
3. 4 3.64
8.4 2.49

0.064

.051

. 047
.053
. 049
. 048
.139
.138
.136
.137
.133
.133
. 102
.227
. 230
. 234
. 222
.188
.165
.343
. 357
. 347
.290

. 226
.171

18.6
20.0
20.2
18. 4
20. 0
20.7
15. 3
15. 4
15.7
15.6
15.2
13.8
16. 9
16.8
16.9
16. 3
16.7
16.7
16. 0
16. 8
16.0
16.2
16.8
16. 1
14. 6

12.4
13.9
15.5
15.5
15.0
12.8
11.3
12.1
12.0
12.0
9.8
7. 0
8.3
8.9
9.4
9.9
7.9
4.5
2.3
6.2
6.2
5.7
4.0
1.9
1.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

88
90
90
90
90
90
88

88

89
89
90
90
82
89
90

90

90
91
91
91
92
92
93
94
93

59
62
62
62
62

63

1,200
1,000
800

600

400
320
1, 200
1, 0G0
800

58
58
59
600
59
420
60
62
320
305
57
61 1,200
62 1,000
800
60
61
600
420
62
330
64
62 1,200
62 1, 000
800
64
65
600
420
65
280
65

2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5

I

47 8

AER,O N AUTICS.

TABLE

II-V III. - Log oj carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to A UiJU$t, 1916Continued .
CA R BURETOR NO. 10.

[July 5, 1916; average barometer, 29. 2 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.7275.)

-

.

- -.

.g

.,;
Z

...,[!j

",'

"
ill

~

104
105
106
107
108
109
110
I II
112
113
114
lI5
116
117
118

'- .!;l

....

1
1
1
1

t

~

5.7
9.8
10.5
10.7
15.8
10 7
7.5
.

1
t

!
!

t

-'"

~o

>

~

~

';i

-

~
"'.
co2

:s

co..,

r~

24.0
3.2
6.6
8.2
9.2
9.2

8.0
12.8
13.5
13.7
15.7
10.3
7.4
14.6
2. 9
25.7
2. 8
5.7
7.1
7.9
8.0

~ s:I"

~.-~ 6:;'- ~

&~

~'§
§

<:>

0

p.,

p.,

13.7
2.3 5.90
22.6
3.5 7. 40
24.0
3.9 7.63
24.4
3.9 7.64
31.5
5. 8 4.85
21. 0
4.2 4.07
14.9
3.6 1.53
31. 6
5.8 2. 15
6.2
1. 8 1. 01
49.7 14.6 .545
6.0
1.5 .985
12.3
3.1 1. 40
15.3
3.5 1.55
17.1
3.9 1.64
17.2
3.9 1.64

~-5
.!;l

g.'-oa.

.as .

.. :s

--5 .<:l~ f;.,~~ ~~~ ~'§
...g ..... h c.3
o.!;l
:s

.!;l

§

~

~

E-5
g.!;l

Venturi meter.

~e~ .~ 2~

a""
~ -e ~

d
:;:;
co

~

... ~ s

~

0.372
.465
.480
.490
.266
.210
. 080
. 130
.058
. 042
.056
.077
.100
. 090
.095

~

...

0:::

-.0
C ...

Po<

15. a
15.9
15.9
15.6
18.2
19.4
19.1
16.5
17.4
13.0
17.8
18. 3
15.5
18. 2
17.3

p., .....

1.4
2. 2
2.5
2.5
.95
.70
.20
.35
12.8
6.3
15.2
7.4
11. 6
13.5
13.9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

-

0

~'g

~..!,.

~

0

s:I

1i 0

83

1"1

57
57
56
56
58
58
62
60
58
60
58
60
58
58
58

84

82
84
83
86
87
86
7
87
87
87

~Z

...

::d? ~ .~~
_.0

83
82
82

~ .,;

-:s

o~H;
e ~Ef

.u

..

'"
" ·S
~2i

Temperature, of.

~
.0

~

~
E-<

600

600

400
145
220
270
125

420

240
390

500

600

.B i
S :s
" j"g
" .S

:i
oS
~.,

",.c

.... "
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
3

800

1,000
1,200

g.

""~

2. 00
1.95
1. 95
1. 95
1. 95
2.00
2. 05
2.10
2.10
2·10
2.10
2.10
2.15
2.15
2.15

g,~
]~

~..,

6.27
7.87

8.11

8.13
5.12
4. 28
1.61
2.2
1.07
. 59
1. 05
1.48
1.65
1. 73
1. 74

IJuly 6, 1916; average barometer, 29.99 inches.)
119
; 13.3 11.4
120
26.0 22. 1
121
6.0
5.2
122
7.0
6.2
123
7.3
6.5
124
7.5
6.7
125
7.3
6.5
126
15.3 14. 9
127
11.8 11.1
128
7.1
6.4
129 . t~ 10.5
19.5
130 1
4.9
6.9
131 1
4.2
6.1

!
i

I

24.7
48.1
11.2
13.2
13.8
14. 2
13. 8
30.8
22.9
13.5
39.0
11.8
10.3

5.a
9.0
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.9
2.8
5.6
4.6
3.2
7.0
2.0
1.9

/t 94
2.59
3.16
3.25
3.35
3.39
3.33
4·80
4.25
3.30
5.33
5.50
5.15

0.110
.172
.195
.215
. 215

. 220

.215
.319
.280
.200
. 375
.370
.352

17.6
2.9
15.1
6.0
16.2
9
15. 1 10.2
15.6 11. 1
15. 4 I!. 7
15.6 10.8
15.1
4.8
15. 2
3.7
16.5
1.9
14.2
6. 8
14.9
6. 8
14. 7
6.2

0 82
0
2
0 82
0 81
0 82
0 82
0 81
0 85
0 85
0 85
0 85
0 84
0 85

58
220
56
400
55
500
54
600
54
700
53
800
55 1,~
57
710
360
56
820
56
900
56
700

4
4
4

4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5

gg

2.1J
2·10
2.10
2.10
2.05
2.05
2.05
2·00
2·00
2.00
2.00
2· 00
2.00

2· 05
2.76
3.36
3.47
3·57
3.61
3·57
5.12
4·53
3· 50
5.71
5.87
5·50

CARBURETOR NO.2.

[July 10,1916; average barometer, 29.92 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.7275.J
132
~
133
~
134
135
136
137
~
138
139
140
t
141
~
142 1
143 1
144 1
145
~
146
t147
148
149
t
150
151
152 4
153 4
154 4
155 4
156
157
158
1
159 1
160 1
161 1
162 1

7. 7
6.3 l4.0
9.0
7.5 16.5
9.3
7.7 17.0
9.3
7.7 17.0
9.1
7.6 16.7
9. 0
7.5 16.5
8.8
7.3 16.1
5.5
4.3
9.8
15.9 14.9 30.~
9.3
8.2 17.5
7.6
17.4
9.3
21.1
9.4 11. 9 21.3
16.6 14. 2 30. 8
5.7
4. 5 10.2
7. 7
6.5 14.2
8. 6
7.5 16. 1
8.6
7.5 16.1
4.7
3.4
8.1
8.5
7.4 IS.9
12. 6 n . 5 24.1
16. 9 16.2 33.1
18.
18.2 37.0
1 .6 18. 1 36. 7
21.4 18.3 30.7
9.2
8.0 17.2
17.5 17. 0 34.5
6.0
8. 2 14. 5
7.7 10.0 17.7
8.0 10. 0 1 .2
8.0. 10. 2 18.2

1

t

~

t

i

lU

3. 4 1 49
1.
4.0 1. 61
4.0 1.64
4.0 1.64
4.0 1.63
3.9 1.62
3. 9 1.60
2.5 2·85
5.8 4·80
3.6 3.75
2.9 6·60
3.6 7·20
3.6 7.20
6.6 2.14
2.3 2.87
3.2 3. 38
3. 5 3.60
3.5 3·60
2.0 2.59
3.5 3.58
4.6 4.32
6.1 4.99
7.0 5.23
7.7 5.22
7.7 2.39
3. 7 3.72
6.8 5. 10
2. 7 6.05
3.0 6. 68
3.1 6.71
3. 1 6.71

0.124
. 125
.127
.132
.128
.124
.125
.311

.375
.348
.425
.436
.436
. 150
.163
.173
. 173
.172
.154
.175
.186
.197
·202

·206

.162
.191
.211
.223
.231
. 234
. 234

.

12.1
12.9
13.0
12.5
12.8
13. 0
12.8
9.2
12.8
10.8
15.5
16.5
16.5
14.2
17. 6
19.5
20. 8
21.0
16.8
20.4
23.2
25.4
25.9
25.4
14.7
19.5
24.2
27.2
28. 9
28. 7
28. 7

9.3
13.5
13. 3
9.35
9.20

·i3.'4"
1.1
1.7
1.35
2.20
2.40
2.40
3.45
6.00
8.80
10.2
10.5
2.0
3.3
4.4
6.0
6.8
6.
1.3
1. 7
2. 6
9. 1
3.6
3.7
3.7

00
o 1 89
0
o 88
o
8

g

~

0
0
0

89
88
88

g 88
~
o
o

~

g

~

0
0
o

88
89
89

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9
89
89
89
88
88
88
88
88

g~
g~

63
60
58
58
60
61
61
60
64

63

66

280
450
820
750
620
620
750
295

550

420
750
930
1,000
275
430
610
750
920

66
66
66
70
70
70
69
66
280
69
420
70
570
70
730
70
900
70 1,000
66
265
68
420
69
600
70
750
70
900
70 1,000
70 1,100

I

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2

2

2
2
3
3
3
~

3
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

1.95
1.00
1.90
1.90
1.90
1.90
1. 90
1.90
1. 85
1.90
1.90
1.90
1. 90
1. 95
1. 85
1.85
1. 95
1. 95
1. 9.5
1.90
1.90
1. 90
1. 90
1. 95
1.95
1. 90
1.90
1. 90
1.90
1. 90
1. 90

1. 61
1. 74
1. 77
1.77
1. 76
1. 74
1.73
3. 16
5. 18
4.10
7.03
7.64
7.64
2.29
3.03
3·55
3.77

3. 77

2.74
3.67
4.51
5.19
5.43
5.43
2. 55
3:91
5.al
6.27
6.91
6.94
6.94

-

479

AERON AUTICS.
TABLE

U-VIII.-Log Of carburetor tests , Columbia University, June to August, 1916Continued .
CARBURETOR NO . 7.
[July 11, 1916; barometer, 29.90 inches; gasoline, 8.0., 0.7275.]

.s:i

0

Z

-

.Q,Q ..:

.".g

.... s::::ICI$

- -5
:f \p.9

"'".s

"'gj
~-"

~

'~i

<Il

..

",

.. - '"
3- .8 ~ '§

~'§

~.'""'~

0

0",

•

~.S

.

163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179

1BO

181
1 2
183
184
185
186
187
188
1 9
190
191
192
193
194
195

·~.S

H

1
1
1
1
1
1

t
t

~

!
,

,
~
~

i

i
t
t
1
1
1
1

,

i
i

~

B.3
8. 6
9. 1
9.0
8.8
5.4
11.3
5.5
5.6
6.1
6.4
6. 4
6.2
13.0
19.3
24.9
5.4
5.6
5.3
5.3
9.8
15.9
22.3
B.3
9.8
10.3
10. 0
20.8
7.3
11. 0
13.8
16.3
16. 5

10.4
10.8
11.4
11.3
11.1
7. 2
10.1
4.2
4.7
5.1
5.4
5. 4
5.2
11.0
16.3
21.2
4.1
4. 3
4.1
4. 0
.6
15.1
22.0
10.4
12.4
12. 9
12. 7
17.5
5. 9
9.9
12.9
15.5
15.7

".~
t:i

IB . 7
19.4
20.6
20.3
19.9
12.6
21. 4
9. 7
10. 3
11. 2
11. 8
!l.8
11.4
24 . 0
35.6
46.1
9.5
9. 9
9.4
9.3
1 .4
31. 0
44.3
1 .7
22.2
23.2
22.7
38.3
13.2
20.9
26.7
31.8
32.2

~ <=I"

3.2
3.2
3.4
3.4
3.3
2.1
4.1
2.3
2.8
2.9
3.2
3.2
3.1
7.3
7.3
9.0
2.3
2. 3
2.2
2.1
3. 6
5.8
8. 0
3.1
3.6
3.8
3.8
7.7
2.6
4.3
5.3
6.2
6. 2

0

§

0

P-1

P-1

6.84
6.93
7. 10
7.10
7.00
5.64
4. 11
2.84
1.28
I. 33
1. 38
1.36
1. 35
I. 92
2.28
2.54
2.81
2.84
2. 1

0. 517
.485
. 522
.533
.533
.440
.320
.231
.136
. 145
.158
. 152
. 148
. 214
.240
.232
.219

2.BO

3.83
4.85
5.65

6.BO

7. 38
7.53
7. 52
2. 35
3.28
4.07
4.58
4.88
4.92

. 209

.236
.219
.296
.363
.432

. 500

. 563
.518
.578
.215
.271
.298
.334

j~

~

~

13.2
14.3
13. 6
13.3
13. 15
12.8
12.75
12. 3
9.4
9.15
8. 75
9.10
9.15
8.83
9. 50
10. 9
12.8
13.6
11. 9
!~.

g

13. 4
13.4
13.1
13.6
13. 1
13.0
13. 0
10. 95
12.10
13.65
13.75
13.3
13.4

ture, OF.

.0 - - ..,0 • S O~
'0""'" .'" "'-.2 ! ~~ •
"'lH,
"'~3 ~ ~ cP ' _ ~
3.0 e
~ ... "
... 58 ~ ~2 1""§~
~ ='..=..c
~J..4'"

.. 21

Temper a~

0

" '"
w
- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - -- - -

§
~

"
.9

- ::;gj
-

~~

...

~

.~~

3-"1
...,,,
g.9
>
-<Il
...,,,, ..., ...,

Venturi meter.

$..0

P-1

P-1

3.0
3. 2
3.3
3.3
3.2
2.0
1.1
.55
9. 9
13.3
15. 0
15.0
14.0
4. 7
7.9
10.7
12.2
13. 7
12.4
.4
. 75
1.1
1.7
2.2
2.6
2.7
2.7
1.8
3.2
4.7
6.4
7.7
8.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

H

a0

'"
§
:gi

-0:>

8'
.,] '~i

""

.~

~

e'~ ~z
.~~ 13
0

"
<=1.9

.~

...'"

.

~.o

0

E-<

r.<

"'8
~

..:l"

",.<l

- --- - ---7

~

88
88
88
88
88
90
90
9~

90
90
90

90
90
90

90
90
92
91
90
90
90

90
90
91
92
92
92
92
92
92

84
66
66
65
66
66
66
66
64
63
60
60
60
65
63
64
64
63
63
68

66
66
66
66
66
66
66
67
67
67
66
65

830
920
1,000
1,100
920
630
430

280

265
400
520
640
810
260
390
520
640
800
1,000
270
400
520
630
750
900
1,000
1,100
275
400
520

650
800

64 - ... . ..

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

2
2

2
2
3
3
3
J
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5

'"

~'§

§ ...
8.~
S~

t:....,

0.95
.95
.95
.90
.95
. 95
. 95
.95
1. 00
1. 00
1. 00
.95
1.00
1.00
.95
1. 00
1.00
.95
.95
1.00
1.00
.95
.95
.90
. 90
.90
.90
.95
. 95
. 95
.95
.90
.90

7.3 6
7.4 2
7.62
7.63
7.53
6. 08
4.43
3.07
1.42
1.48
1.04
1.53
1.50
2.13
2. 52
2.79
3.03
3. 05
3. 05
3.02
4.13
4. 21
6. 08
7.3o
7. 94
8.11
8.10
2.57
3. 55
4.37
4.91
5.25
5. 29

1. 75
1. 80
I.S0
1. 0

7.86
8.40
8.01
8.57
8.65
8.73
9. 22
6.09
5.91
4.53
2. 37
2.37
3.60
1. 46
I. 47
1.42
1. 34
2.59
2.09
3.20
3.37
3.49
3. 42
2.42
3.20
4. 25
5.08
5.42
5.41

CARBURETOR NO.3.
[Jul y 12, 1916; average barometer, 29.86 inches; gasoline, 8. 0,0.7275.)
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
2!l
212
213
214
215
216

~~~
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

i

'i
i

,
1

!

~

!

i
t
,
,
t
t

t

1
1

9.9
11. 6
11. 9
12.1
12.4
12.7
14.3
7.5
5.2
12. 1
18.8
7.7
15.9
7.3
7.4
6.8
6.2
23.0
14.5
6. 2
6.8
7.3
7. 0
2.0
6.3
10. 5
15.4
11.5
4. 2
4.2
10.8

12.3
14.2
14.6
14.9
15.1
15.6
17.5
9. 7
7. 0
10.7
14.0
6.2
19.2
4.7
4. 8
4.3
3.8
1 .0
10. 9
4.3
5.5
5.9
5.6
15.9
4.8
9.3
14. 4
16. 5
5.8
5. 8
7.8

22.2
25.8
26.5
27.0
27.5
28.3
31. 8
17.2
12.2
22. 8
33.0
13. 9
35.1
12. 0
12.2
11.0
10.0
41.0
25.4
11. 0
12.3
13. 2
12.6
35.9
11.1
19.8
ZO.8
34.0
10.0
10.0
18.6

3.6
4.2
4.3
4. 3
4. 3
4.5
5.2
2.9
2. 1
4.6
6.5
3.0
5.8
3. 1
3. 1
3.1
2.8
8.0
5.3
2.6
2.9
2.9
2.8
7.2
2.6
4. 0
5.7
6. 4
1. 6
1. 6
3.5

7.40
7.90
8.00
8.05
8.13
8. 20
8.65
6.57
5.56
4.25
2.22
3.35
9.00
1.38
1.59
3. 14
1.27
2.42
1. 96
3.00
3. \6
3.27
3.20
2.27
3.00
3.97
4.76
5.04
5.08
5.08
1. 70

0.462
.500
. 511
.518
.524
.533
.572
. 418
. 348
.276
.153
. 233
. 600
.078
.081
.074
.067
. 177
.132
.205
.214
.222
.218
.104
. 202
. 276
.324
. 376
. 329
. 328
.104

1.5
16.0
15.8
1.6
15.6
1.7
1.7
15.5
1.7
15.5
15.9
1.7
15. 1
1.9
15.7
1.3
16.0
1. 0
15. 4
9.8
.8
14.5
14.4
.8
15.0
2. 1
17.7 13.8
17.2 15.0
18.1 12.0
S. 8
19.0
13.7
5.7
14.8
3.4
8.8
14.6
14. 1 10.8
14.7 11. 9
14.7 11.1
14.7
1.5
14.9
2.0
14.4
2.4
14.7
6.4
13.4
7.4
8.1
15.4
15.4
8. 1
16.4
6.3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

86
86
86
86
86
86
87
88
88
88
88
88
88
89

90
90
90
90

90

90
90
90
90

90

64
64
64
64
64
64
64
66
66
66
67
66
64
66
66
68
69
67
68
66
64
64

64
68

800
920
1,010
1,100
1, liS
1,400
1,600
720
5.0
450
230
345
1,800
420
570
360
240
370
250

5\0
650
830
1,000
250

68
350
90
91
68
426
700
91
65
91
65 1,000
92 . . ... . 1,200
1,400
92
92 '''68'
255

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5

1.BO
LBO

1. 80
1. 80

LBO

1. BO

LBO

1. 80
1. 80
1. 80

L BO
1.BO
LBO
LBO

I.BO

LBO
I.BO
I.BO
1.BO
LBO
1.BO
LBO
I. BO
LBO

1. 80

L BO
L BO

1. BO

1. 81

480

AERONAUTICS.

TABLE

II-VIII.-Log oj carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August, 1.916Continued.
CARBURETOR NO.3-Continued.

227

rJ

230
231
232
233
231

~

UJ

19. 7
15.2
14.3

1
iU
i

5.9

9.4
10.7
11. 0
11.5
10.(\
4.1
4.3
4.5

22.2
24.9
25.7
26.7
24.9
9.6
10. 1
10. 4

4.1
4.5
4. 6
4.7
4.5
1. 8
1.9
1.9

1. 85
1. 94
1.98
2.02
1. M
2.80
2.89
2.92

. 120
. 128
. 131
.134
.125
. 185
.192
.192

15.4
15. 1
15.0
15. 1
15.5
15.1
15.0
15.2

8.5
10.9
13.0
13.4
13.25
10. 1
11.2
11. 4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

92
92
92
92
92
94
93
93

~~

67
66
66
68

66
66

330
430
530
600
730
530
630
710

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

1. 80
1. SO
1. 0
1. 80
1. 80
1. 0
1.80
1. 80

1. 97
2. 07
2.U
2.15
2.07
2.96
3.08
3. U

1
1
1

1. 85
1. 90
1. 90
1.90
1. 90
1.90
1.90
1. 95
1. 90
1. 90
1. 90
1. 85
1. 85
1. 80
1. 80

7.19
8.49
8.81
7. 69
6.05
6. 02
4.24
2.79
1.14
1.17
1.19
1.49
1.60
1. 70
1.72

5
5
5
5

1. 85
1. 85
1. 85
1. 85
1. 5
1. 5
1. 85
1. 90
1. 90
1.90
1.90

1.98
1. 4
1.65
2.03
2.05
2.06
2. 06
3.70
3.89
3.90
3.77

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
I
I
I
I

1. 90
1. 90
1. 95
2.00
2.00
1. 95
1. 90
2.00
1. 95
1. 95
1. 95

1. 78
2.24
2.53
3.35
3.46
2.55
2.34
3.21
3.68
4.72
5.87

CARll RETOR ",,0. 6.

[July 13, 1916; average barometer, 29 .80 i nches; gasoline, S.G., 0.7275.
235
236

~~

239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246

~l~

2-W

1
1
I

1
1
1
1

t

~

t

t
t
~

11.1
11.8
13.0
9.5
5.3
3.6
2.4
4. 9
4.7
4.9
5.0
7.7
8.4
9.7
9.8

13. 7
14.6
15.9
11.9
7. 0
5.0
3.7
3.3
2. 5
2.6
2.7
5. 1
5.7
6.7
6. 8

4.0
4.3
4.8
21.4
12.3
8.6
6.1
8.2
7. 2
7.5
7.7
12. 8
14.1
16.4
16.6

24.8
26.4
28.9

U
4.1
4.3
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.0
3.3
3. 4
3.9
3.9

7.70
8. 00
8.30
7.25
5.70
4.72
4.00
2.61
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.42
1.50
1. [0
1.62

0.490
.485
.513

:~
.296

.243
. 182

.064

.068

.008

.086
.095
.098
.098

15.7
16.5
16.2
16. 3
16.4
16.0
16.4
14.3
16.9
16.2
16.5
16.5
15.8
16.4
16.5

1. 8
1. 8
1.8
1. 5
1.0
.7
.5
.5
10. 5
13. 2
14.4
8. 1
9. 9
12.3
13.3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

93
93
92
92
92
92
92
92
93
92
93
92
92
92
92

66
66
66
66

66
66
66
66
66
66

66
66
66
66
66

1,000
1,200
1,600

800
600

500
400

260

220
340
420
250
320
420
520

I

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
3

(July 14, 1916; average barometer, 29.96 inches.)
250
25 1
252
253
254
255
256
257

~g

260

t

~
~
~
~

t
t

it

13.2
11. 3
9. 2
14.0
13.9
14.0
14.0
8.2
9.2
9.2
8.5

9.5
8.0
6. 1
10.2
10.1
10.2
10.2
6.5
7.5
7.5
6.9

22. 7
10.3
15.3
24.2
24.0
24.2
24.2
14.7
16.7
16.7
15.4

4.8
4. 3
3.7
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
3. 1
3. 4
3.4
3.2

1.86
1. 73
1.55
1. 92
1. 92
1. 92
1. 92
3.47
3.65
3.65
3.62

0.121
.110

. 094

.112
.125
. 138
.136
. 233
.240
.246
. 250

15.3
15.7
16.5
17.2
15.3
13.9
14.1
14.9
15.2
14.9
14.1

U. 5
9.2
6. 3
13.0

12:. ~
12
12.8
.8
10.5
10.5
9.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

86
87
87
87
88
88
88
7
88
88
88

61
63
64
62
60
60

60
60
59
59
59

420
320
220
560
720
560
560
560
720
920
1, 100

4
4
4
4
4
4

4

(Jul y 21, 1916.)
261
262

263

264

265
266
267
268
269
270
271

iI
t

l
'1

t
t
t
i

8.5
14.5
19.4
7.3
7.6
5. 6
4.0
6. 7
8.4
13. 8
21. S

9.5
15.0
19. 3
5. 0
5.3
3.3
1.7
4.4
6.1
H.6
20.1

I .0
29.5
3 .7
12.3
12.9
8.9
5. 7
11. 2
14.5
25.4
41.9

6. 6
10. 4
7.4
6.5
6.5
6.9
7.2
6.9
6. 8
6.0
7.5

1. 66
2.10
2.35
3. 13
3. 23

~:~

3.00
3.43
4.42

5.50

0.122
.140
.1 2
. 222
. 226
.168
.155
.212
.248
.308
. 368

13. 6
15.0
12. 3
14.1
14.4
14.2
14.1
14.2
13.8
14.4
14.9

1. 85
3.00
4.50
7.00
8. 00
4. 00
2.80
. 60
. 80
1. 00
1.20

0
0
0
0

~

o

88
88
90

0
0
0
0

90
90
90

~ ro
90

66
66
64
64
64
66
66
66
66
66

66

200
250
345
480
560
340
250

290

350
450
580

481

AERON A.UTICS.
T ABLE

II-VII I.-Log o/carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to At.:gust, 1916- ·
Continued.
CARBURETOR NO 5.

[July 29, 1916; average barometer, 30.30 inches; gasoline, S. G., equals 0.7175.]
';::gj

313
g.S

Venturi metor.
,

d

Z

.d

,

:~ .:;~
Wl.g

<>

.S

,

'

:>-

~

,

~"'
"'~ .
~CD~ " ' 0 ...

...

...

8.

"'~
"'
"" g~ S:;
g-5 x Tempera- :gJl ~ "''''' .~ .p
tura, OF.
".S .0
~
"
o:l.S ,a.§
'" '
~ .s ",6
0)

"

0

'"
Ulo:;

.!:l

'"

'"
",,2l.

~~
'-o:l'" ~ ~ ~ ".S
oS
~ po;
;c.
0)"

0

0'"

"'~

~S

.S ~.s r~ 5-0. ~a
CD o~ CD
~~;:J
;glil
='.0 e :; ~f-Ei~
Ul CD::; +=0
.....

~E~

"".s
:3

0

..... 1.1
..

~z
~

§ ...

_.8

0'"
p,p,

oS

",13 5 ~
0'"

0
...

~5s ~ ~a 0-.0
a H°.9 ·-.s ::1._'" e·. .
"'
p:1
po;
" .<:I H Eo<
p:1
Eo<
'" Po;
~
- - -'" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 272
273
274

co'
!l

,
t
t

Zlo 1

276
277
278
279

1
1
1

281
282
283

i
i

i

zeo

284
285

286

287

288
289

290
291
292
293
294
290
296
297
298
299
300
301
302
303
304
305
306
307
308
309

t

;
t

t

1
1
1

t
!
t

1
1
1

t

t

1

!
,
t

t
t

12.5
10.5
18.6
9.0
12.7
13.1
13.5
5.6
5.9
6.1
6.0
16.3
9. 4
19.5
9.3
12.3
12.5
10.3
10.5
18. 0
7.8
9.7
10. 0
9.3
6.7
10.1
8.8
14.7
19. 8
6.8
7.3
7.7

t

1

~.O

4. 8
5. 0
0. 5
0.7
5.5

15.5
7.6
16. 2
9.8
14.1
14. 6
14.9
5.3
5.5
5.9
5.8
18.5
6.4
17.4
10.1
13.5
13.9

1~:~

15.5
8.4
10.5
11.0
6.0
4.0
11. 1
12.3
17.2
21.6
4.0
4.5
4.8
8.1
8. 9
9.0
5.2
5.3
9. 5

28. 0
1 .1
34.8
18.8
26.8
27.7
28. 4
10. 9
11.4
12. 0
11.8
34.8
15.8
36. 9
19. 4
25.8
26.4
17. 9
24.3
33.5
16.2
20.2
21. 0
15.8
10.7
21 . 1
21.1
31. 2
41. 4
10.8
11.8
12.5
12.1
13. 7
14.0
5.7
6.2
15.0

5. 8
3.6
6.6
3.2
4.5
5.4
4.6
3.7
3.9
5.5
4.5
7.1
3.3
7.1
3.2
4.2
4.2
3.7
5.3
6. 4
2.7
3.3
3.3
3.3
2.6
3.4
4.6
6.4
8.0
2.3
2.6
2. 8
3. 1
3.3
3.4
1.5
1.5
3.5

2. 07
3.80
5.11
6.82
8.00
8.15
8. 21
.277
. 282

.290

. 288
2.25
3.56
5.20
6.92
7.00
8.00
3.77
1.94
5.00
6.40
7.08
7. 25
3. 56
2.93
7.26
1. 82
2. 16
2.43
2.94
3. 12
3. 18
1.39
1. 47
1. 50
.97
1. 01
1.54

§
0

o:m

.284
.392
.4 7
. 512
.527
.038
. 037
.037
.036

:~~

.299
.412
.502
.516
.220
.113
.272
.377
.422
.440
.184
.158
.430
.106
.120
. 138
.149
.154
.162
. 082
.083
.084
. 056
. 061
.0SI

~""'.o::sE~

·ti>A

PO '"

~

18. 3
19.2
18.02
17.40
16. 45
15.92
15.70
7.30
7.62
7.83
8.57
16. 32
18. 97
17.40
16.80
15.76
10.50
17.15
17.15
18.40
16.98
16.80
16.47
19. 30
18.52
16.85
17.13
18.00
17. 60
19.70
20.30
19. 65
16. 95
17.70
17.70
17.30
16.05
17.30

11.10
1.00
1.10
1.20
1. 50
1. 70
1. 70
1.00
1.00
1. 80
2. 50

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1. 30
1.20
3.20
3.10
4.30
5.70
8.40
9.30
10. 30
2.10
2.20
2.20
1.30
1. 40
2. 30

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1. 00
1.00
1.20
1. 40
1. 70
1. 70
1. 70
12.00
13. 10

H.oo

~:ro I g

78
78
78
78
80
81
81
81
81
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
2
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84

58
53
53
53
53
54

55

~§

53
53
56
54
55
56
56
58
60
60
60
60
60
60
64
60
60
68
64
60
60
60
60
62
61
61
61
61
65

210
390
540
700
880
1, 050
1,250
160
200
260
125
240
380
550
730
900
1, 060
400

205

550
740
900
1,000
380
300
1,1 00
230

290

380
500

eoo

720
160
180
160
80
100
165

I
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

2.15
2. 15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2. 15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2. 10
2.15
2. 15
2. 15
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.10
2.15
2.15
2. 15
2.15
2.15

2.18
4.00
5.39
7.21
8.49
8.66
8.80
. 313
.319
. 3Z1
.324
2.39
3.75
5. 50
7. 33
8.40
8. 52
3. 99
2.05
5.27
6. 77
7.50
7.69
3.74
3.09
7. 69
1.92
2.28
2.57
3.09
3. ZI
3.34
1. 47
1.55
1. 58
1. 03
1. 07
1.63

CARDURETOR NO.7.

[J uly 25,1916; averago barometer, 30.05 inches; gasoline, S. G., equals 0.683.]
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326

I
1
1
1
I

t

1

1
i

6.9
7.8
10.0
10.4
10. 5
13.0
6.4
11.2
17.2
7.0
5.0
2.7
2. 7
6.9
8.0
11.0
12. 0

7. 6
8.8
11.4
11. 7
11. 8
13. 2
3.8
8.7
15.0
7.8
2.5
4. 1
4.1
7.6
8.6
11. 2
12.3

14.5
16.6
21. 4
22.1
22. 3
26.2
10.2
19. 9
32.2
14. 8
7.5 .
6.8
6.8
19.5
16. 6
22.2
24.3

2.4
2. 7
2. 3
3. 5
3. 5
5.4
3.0
4.2
6.0
2. 5
2.5
2.0
2. 0
3.6
4.0
4. 9
5.3

6.06
6.40
7.23
7.38
7.40
1.98
2.00
3.95
4. 90
6.08
2. 50
1.06
1.06
1.50
1.63
1.85
1. 92

0.472
. 508
.583
.580
. 50
.192
. 224
.307
. 372
. 448
. 218
.096
.099
. 171
. 157 .
. 153
. 138

72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2- -31

12.85
12.60
12.40
12.75
12. 75
10.30
12. 90
12.90
13.20
13. 60
11. 50
11.10
10.70
8.50
10.40
12. 10
12.20

7.8
2.0
2. 8
2.8
2.7
.2
.5
1. 0
1.4
1.8
.2
10.7
13.5
5.1
5.0
7.2
10.8

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82

700
48
50
850
50 1,000
50 1,200
49 1,300
50
200
50
3ao
400
50
48
550
49
700
50
250
220
65
51
300
58 __ -0. _56
220
56
300
400
56

1
I
1
I
1
I
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
3

.. -. - .
.... -_ ... --

_._.--

_.-.-.
,_,,0 •

.----_.-.--._. 0.. -_..
.. - . 0'0---___ '0 , , _ _ 0'

.. - -_ .
_ _ _ 0 -

'

------

6. 53
6.91
7.81
7.96
7.98
2. 17
3.12
4.26
5. 27
6.53
2.72
1.16
1.16
1. 67
1.79
2.00
2.08

482

AERONAUTICS.

TABLE

II-VIII .-Log o/carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August, 1916Conti n ued.
CA R BU R ETO R NO. 7-Continued.
(Jul y 26,1916; average bar om eter, 29.97 inches; gasoline, S. 0 ., equals 0.683 .1
- :(l

Venturi m eter.

.,;

Z

§
~

- 327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339
340

- -

-.,

B.g

~

...

·;as

~.s

~ .g
:.l.S

:S
..

'"

"' ...
... gj
... "
~..t:I"; f4>s,;
.S - -5 ;;gj .. "g =>- s ~.~
...g •.... ~d
~.:1,' :l
.§- .,.S ·~ .S ~.~~ p:; ..... .... 0

"li

":(l

~

Po -

0"

.o~~

",

~.~
§

.,;
:;;

~

.,

I

Tempera·
t ure, of.

.0 , _ _ _ _

.s

'" r

.~
oS
o =>

..

~.

., ~ ~ s
~ .,; ".S ~ .~
Z _B p,p.,

~

"''''3
3=>"
~i! ~
::13 8

f'~
3
0
~ ~~ ~~~ .!~ 3
= ='.!::.o r.1 ..a
po. ,...,130
E-<

13.0
2.6
3.4
4.8
7.5
9. 9
12.4
9.2
1.3
2. 7
4.8
6.7
6. 6
6. 6

0 ....
0 81
0 81
0 81
0 82
0 83
0 83
0 83
0 84
0 85
0 85
0 85
0 85
0 85

0";";' ~

•

S "'13£
"' -

.~

"'8

1>"
.,-'"

'"
h

-.,
a

..9 ...
0

Po<
Po<
Po<
H"
"
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -'"- - - - - - - - - - - - - -E-< CIJ

!
!
!
t
t

1
t
t
t
t

t

1

...:l

~

8. 6
10. 3
16.3
5.9
7.7
8.4
7.0
7.0
4. 4
7. 7
13. 1
15. 8
16.1
16.2

.0
10.6
16.0
3.2
5.1
5.7
4.5
4.5
1.9
5.1
10.5
13.5
13.8
13.9

0

16. 6
20.9
32.3
9.1
12. 8
14.1
U.5
ll.5
6.3
12.8
23.6
29.3
20.0
30.1

4.2
4.5
6.5
3.0
2.~

3.0
2. 5
2.5
1.5
2.8
4.6
5.6
6.7
5.6

1.62
1.80
2.20
2. 75
3.23
3.40
3.07
3. 07
2.30
3.22
4.28
4.77
4.77
4.77

0.li5
.199
.209
.215
.234
.239
.219
.214
.198
.243
.297
.332
.336
.336

p::

9.06
9.10
10.52
12. ' 0
12.12
14.30
14.02
14. 35
11. 62
13.25
14.43
14.40
14.22
14.22

1-0

1-0

49
54
54
56
57
56
56
57
57
57

g~

~~
58

500

200

270
360
420
20
820
1,000
230
390
550
700
920
1,000

3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5

. . . ...

.. - ...
......

......
......

- .... .

......

......
.. . ...
..... .
......
......
.-- ...

......

1.80
2. 00
2.4
2. 9
3. 48
3. 64
3.29
3.28
2. 50
3. 46
4.58
5.10
5. 11
5.11

CARBURETOR NO . 3.
(Gasoline, S. 0.,0.683.]
341
342
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351
352

353

354
355
356
357
358
359
360
361

i

1
1
1
1

1

i
!
i

It
1
1
1

12.7
9.6
15.8
8.7
1 .1
13.1
13. 4
9.3
15. 1
24 . 3
6.0
6.2
6.3
6.4
15. 1
11. 7
19.5
9.0
11. 6
12.2
12.8

13. 0
7.0
13.5
9.8
13. 7
14.8
15.2
10.0
14. 9
22.0
3. 4
3.7
3.7
3.8
14.8
9.1
18.0
10.0
13. 0
13. 8
14. 5

25.7
16. 6
29.3
18.5
25.8
27.9
28.6
19.3
30.0
46. 2
0.4
10.0
9.9
10.2
29.9
20.8
37.0
19. 0
24.6
26.0
27.3

5.5
3. 2
5. 7
3.0
4.1
4.4
4. 6
4.5
6.2
8.7
2.0
2.3
2.2
2.2
6.3
4.0
7. 2
3. 1
4.0
4.2
4.5

1. 92
3.63
4.75
6.80
7.97
8. 20
8.35
1. 75
2.12
2. 53
2.80
288
2.88
2. 90
2. 12
4. 07
5.2S
6.78
7.70
7.85
7. 95

0.132
. 242
.300
. 404
.488
. 523
.528
.112
. 144
.181
. 190
. 194

.200

. 197
.147

:~~
. 432

.482
.443
.506

14.57
15.00
15.82
16.80
16.30
15.70
15.70
15.60
14.72
14.00
14.71
14.87
14.40
14.73
14.42
15.30
15.50
15.70
16. 00
15.84
19.70

0.80
. 80
. 80
1.10
1.30

. 30

1.30
3. 50
5. 60
9.00
10.40
11. 40
10.90
10.90
. 65
. 75
1.00
1. 30
1. 45
1.50
1.50

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

83
84
84
84
84
85
86
85
85
85
84
84
85
85
85
85
85
85
86
7
87

57
55
55
55
52
56
54
63
61
58
57
57
57
57
60
60
52
51
51
53
52

210
380

500

700
000
1,140
1,300
2"..5
320
450

580

700
880
880
240
440

580
750

900
1,100

.. .....

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
7
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

. .. ...
.. . ...
......
......
......
......
......
.- . ...
..... .
... ...
... .. .

1
1
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5

......
.- . . ..
.. . .. .
......

-.- . _.

. . . ...
. .. . . .
.. .. . .
- .....
.. . ...
... . ..
... . ..
.. ....
.. . .. .

2.05
3. 87
5. 05
7.20
8.46
8.72
8.88
1. 86
2.28
2.71
2.99
3.07
3.08
3.10
2.27
4.34
5.59
7.21
8.18
8.35
8.46

[July 27,1916; average barometer, 29.88 inches; gasoline, S. 0.,0.683.]
362
363
364
365
366
367

1
1

I

588 1
369 1
370
a71
372
373
374

I

9.0
11. 5
13.0
8.0
14.4
21.5
6.4
6. 5
3.6
16.8
16.5
7.0
6.6

10.2
12.7
12. 8
5.3
12.0
19.8
7.1
7.2
4. 8
16.2
3.7
4.3
4.0

19.2
24 . 2
25.8
13.3
26.4
41.3
13.5
13.7
8.3
33.0
10.2
11.3
10.6

3.2
3.9
5.3

......
5.0
7.6
2.2
2. 2
4.0
7.7
2.5
2.5
2.2

6.90
7.70
1.98
3.32
4.50
5.46
5. 83
5.90
1. 16
2. 20
2.89
3. 04
2.95

0. 415
.46'1
. 135
. 236
.322
. 375
. 371
.374
. 109
.163
.200
. 208
.208

16.60
16.62
14.65
14.10
14.00
14. 84
15.72
15. 75
10.65
13.50
14.43
14.61
14.80

1.0
1.2
1.2
2.0
3.5
4.8
5.7
5. 9
3.0
6.0
8.9
11. 2
10. 2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

81
81
81
81
81
81
83
83

~~
82

82
82

55
52
60
60
59
59
60

60

65
65
59
58
58

740
880
213
380
840
750
1,031
9JO
200
350
530
730
930

......
......
. .. ...
......

......

. . ... .
. .. ...
. . . ...
......

7.32
8. 16
2.12
3.56
4.82
5.83
6.20
5. 07
1. 27
2.36
3.09
3. 25
3.16

483

AERONAUTICS.
TABLE

II-VIII.-Log Of carburetor tests, Columbia Umversity,

Jun~ to

August, 1916-

Continued.
CARBURETOR NO.5.

[July 28,1916; average barometer, 30.25 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.683.]
.-~

Venturi meter.

0

.<i

."
9

~.9

~

-"
.... .."'" ..- . ;]
cs
....g

- -

":e
-.c1

E.c1

::;gl

'; Gi

.cI.c:"": ~4)8

8&
... .g

~
.,
:'S

g.::!

"" -

Tempem·

,.; ture, of.

0

.0

---0";

to

rl

0

:gS
-::s

~

.~

. .!S .

c~

&
0

~,g

s~

~.~
§ ...

°c ..0
. e'§ :;;z ..."'
co> 0 -~ 8.&
~~
"s E~
~-e ~ ~ -.0 :Sf '&,A ...
>",
~,gB

0'"
... 0 •
","I»

~ .S

Q)~~

.9 ....,:..E
4)

~~

Il>aa

..

"s .Q
... " " -:.; ~flS ... ,,'"
§ .!:l
"'.c1
H" ~ ...
I-t~
H
"
-- -'" - -- - - - "" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ""
"" ""
z
~

375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382

383
384

385
386
387
388
389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402
403

404

405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426

..-

,

i
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

i
t

t

t
t
t

t

.I.

CD,a '-.9
~

15.9
9.2
17.6
8.5
12.0
13.2
13.3
13.0
7.8
12.8
16.4
6.0
7.0
4.8
3. 3
4.9
5.0
4.0
10.5
12.5
22.7
8.2
10. 3
11.6
12.2
12.5
12.8
12. 7
9.5
10. 2
10.0
22.1
8. 6
9.3
16.5
21.3
7.0
9.2
9.7
9.7
10.2
6.2
9.1
6.4
4. 0
14.5
6.5
6.8
7. 2
7.0
20.0
7.1

1

!
1
1
1
1
1
1

I
t

1
1
1
1

~

I
t
!
t

COC)~

....

~cd

CD ..... ~

~ -;; il'
.... _

~

15.5 31. 4
6.3 15.5
15.5 33.1
9.3 17.8
13.4 25.4
14. 7 27.9
lS.0 28.3
14. 6 27. 6
8.6 16.4
14.3 27. 1
14.1 30.S
6.0 12.0
6.8 13.8
4. 4
9.2
2.5
5.3
3.2
7.2
4. 5
9.5
4.0
8.0
7.8 18.3
15. 6 28. 1
21. 2 43.9
9.0 17.2
11. 4 21. 7
13. 0 24.6
13.6 25.8
13. 9 26.4
14.3 27.1
14. 2 26.9
6.9 16. 4
7.6 17.8
11. 0 25.0
20.5 42.6
12.0 20. 6
6.6 15.9
14.2 30.7
19. 2 40.5
7.7 14. 7
10.2 19.4
10. 9 20.6
10.8 20.5
13.7 23 . 7
3.4
9. 6
6.5 15.6
10.0 16.0
8.3 12.3
17.5 32.0
3.8 10.3
4.1 10.9
4.4 11.6
4. 4 11. 4
21. 7 41.7
4.3 11.4

0

0

6.4 2.16
2.7 3.55
5.8 4. 06
2.9 8. 70
3.9 7.80
4.7 8.17
4.7 8.27
4. S 8.15
2.6 6.50
4.3 8.13
S.7 4.80
4.0
4.5
3.3 .255
2.1 .204
2.6 .227
3.3 .260
3.3 .238
3.7 4.61
5.7 2.07
8.2 5.60
2. 8 6. 57
3.4 7.26
3.8 7.68
4.2 7.90
4.3 8.00
4. 5 8. 00
4.5 8.00
3.3 3.62
3.8 3.75
4.8 4.37
7.7 5.53
4.6 1. 37
3.3 3.56
5.7 4.82
7.7 5.40
2.3 6.08
3.3 6.95
3. 3 7.10
3.3 7.10
5.6 1. 92
2.0 ,2.80
3.4 3. 58
3.8 1
1.58
2.9 .1.40
6.4 2 18
3.3 1 .
2.90
2. 4 2.98
2.4 3.05
2.5 ('05
8.32.43
2.5 3.05

:~~

0.124
.200
.3O.J
.397
.487
.562
.543
.543
.380
.558
.287
.035
.033
.043
.040
.040
.047
.046
.232
.134
.372
.408
.462
.498
.514
.528
. 535
.545
.207
.228
.262
. 332
. 11 2
. 200
.278
.307
.357
.430
.450
. 433
.123
.169
.206
.097
.082
. 141
.159
.163
.170
. 181
.146
.173

...

~

~

17.4
17.8
16.3
15.86
16.00
14.55
15.20
14.80
16.85
14.56
10.75
8.23
9.64
5.94
5. 10
5.56
5.53
5.17
19.90
15.55
16.10
16. 11
15.70
15.42
15.40
15.15
14.95
14.66
17.50
16.47
16.70
16.67
12.23
17. 80
17.35
17.60
17.05

i~: ?~

16.40
15.60
16.57
17.40
16.28
17.05
15.48
18.25
18.30
17.95
16.85
10.70
17.65

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.20
1.50
1.60
1. 55
1. 60
1. 20
1.60
1.00
11. 7
13.9
13.9
14.8
14.3
9.7
13.2
1.0
.9
1.15
1.35
1. 50
1.60
1.60
1. 70
1. 70
1.60
1.00
1. 00
1.00
1. 20
1.00
1. 30
1.80
2.15
2.50
2.95
3.00
3.10
1.00
1.10
1. 40
2.60
2. 00
4. 60
6.90
9. 50
10.40
10. 60
6. 30
10.50

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

~

0

Jl.4

80
80
80
81
81
82

82
83
83

83
82
81
80
80
80
80
80
80
82

81
81
82
83
83
84
84
84
84
84
83
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
!

84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84

42
42
42
38
38
38
38
38
3S
38
38
50
50
50
52
49
49
49
40
45
42
42
44
44
45
46
46
44
44
43
40
40
50
48
47
46
46
46
50
50
52
52
51
60
54
51
52

54

58
56
56
56

230
370
500
700
860
1,040
1,130
1, 330
700
1,040
500
175
235
285
390
245
120
180
400
225
600
700
820
900
1,000
1, 100
1,240
1,300
380
400
480
610
200

380
520
620
700
860
980
1, 100
205
300
380
210
105
305
450
560
680

850

380
1,000

.c1
Eo<

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

2.4 2. 28
2.4 3.75
2. 4 5.26
2.3 7.10
2.3 8.2!)
2.3 8.73
2.3 8.81
2.3 8.69
2.3 6.88
2. 3 8.69
2.3 5.09
2.3
.323
2.3
.341
2.3
.298
.2H
2.3
2.3
.267
2. 3
.307
2.3
.284
2.3 4.840
2.3 2.200
2.3 5.970
2.3 6.98
2.3 7.71
2.3 8.18
2.3 8.41
2.3 8. 53
2.3 8.54
2. 3 8.55
2.3 3.83
2.3 3.98
2.3 4.63
2.3 5.86
2.3 1. 48
2.3 3.76
2.3 5.10
2.3 5.71
2. 3 6.44
2.3 7.18
2.3 7.38
2.3 7.56
2.3 2.04
2.3 2.97
2.3 3.78
2.3 1.68
2.3 1. 48
2.3 2.32
2.3 3 . 06
2.3 3.14
2.3 3.22
2.3 3. 23
2.3 2.58
2.3 3 .22

CARBURETOR NO.4.

[July 31, 1916; average barometer, 29.85 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.683.J
427
428

m

430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438

~

t
t

1

i

1
1
1
1

,
t
!

15.8
11.7
22.5
10.3
11.0
11.4
11.7
11.7
7.6
8.0
5.0
8.1

18.2
8.7
20.2
11. 4
8.3
12.4
12.8
12.9
8.3
5.1
9.0
11.7

34.0
30.4
42.7
21.7
19.3
23.3
2·1.5
24.6
15.9
13.1
14.0
19. 8

7.0
4.1
8.4
3.3
3.7
3.7
3. 8
3.8
2.7
2.6
3.3
4.5

2.24
4.05
5.60
7.28
3.97
7. 00
7.70
7.70
6. 31
3.27
1. 48
I. 75

0.154
.244

.334
.461
. 244

.177
.488
.497
. 383
.215
.114
.128

14.55
16.60
16. 75
15.78
16.30
15.90
15.75
15.50
16.50
15.20
13.00
13.67

0
.4
1.0
2. 0
.4
2.2
2.5
2.5
1.2
.3
3.8
6.6

0
0
0
0

o
°

86
86
86
88
88
88

g~
0
0
0
0

88
88
88
88

54
56
52
55
55
58
56

56

66
66
60
60

230
400
580
840
400
940
1,070
1,240

680

310
195
295

1 ...... 2. 39
1 ...... 4.29
1 ...... 5.93
1 ..... . 7.74
1 ...... 4.21
1 ...... 8.08
1 ...... .19
1 ...... 8. 20
1 .. .... 6.69
1 .... .. 3.49
2 .. .... 1. 59
2 .. .... 1.88

484

AER ONAUTICS.

TABLE

II-VIII.-Log Of carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August, 1916Continued.
CARBURETOR NG.4-Continued.
.~

Venturi meter.

- ;;$
-

-5
ci
z .s :~ ...g
§

p:;

",-

c7.J

- --

~

439

440
441

442

443

444
445
446
447
448
449

450

451
452

453

454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472

1
1
1
1
1

i

It
1
1
1
1

t
!

I
i

..Q...c::":

B.g

~.s

-

~
,,~

"'''' .
3-3

...

~:3
... .g
;l.s

:0

8-

A

...
·;is
:l

~.§

.,

.. s

A 0 '"

... g.

Temperature OF.

"- - -

0

J

.0

,
-c",'"
'" S
"33 3 ~~ <PB~

.. :l

.03

~s

.s

g..:

~

3.0 ~

9

:g.s
o :l

e'~

"' ...

."

Sui l~
<3
".s ~.§

·il

<t:llll

'"
g.
0

'-

",Z

"",'"

_ .8

:l

~~

:3 ~~a ~ "''' :8~ ·~a B "'8 ~ j
... ..
"'.S
.... Po< Po<
::s~]
.,.0
~.~i>. ~"''' "
p:;
p:;
" p.,
~ ~~ 0
"-<
ril
£:-<
£:-<
- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - -~

11. 8
lI.9
11. 7
12.0
12. 0
12.0
5.0
7.8
11.0
17.8
6.8
8.6
10.3
11. 0
11.0
4.6
7.3
10.8
17.5
7.3
7.0
8.0
8. 5
8.3
20.0
11. 3
6.0
7.4
11. 5
14.0
15.2
16.4
15.7
15.6

I
1

-'"
~'"

gj

-.S

15.0
IS.0
14.9
14. 8
15. 0
15.0
2.0
5. 0
8.2
15.6
7.3
9.3
11. 3
12.0
12.0
1.6
4.5
8.0
15.0
7.9
7. 6
8.7
9.2
9.0
17.5
14.5
3.1
4.7
9.0
11.2
12.6
14.1
13. 3
13.0

""<.>11
~ cI:S

.-

26.8
26.9
26.6
26. 8
27.0
27.0
7.0
12.8
19.2
33. 4
14.1
17. 9
21.6
23.0
23.0
6. ~

p~~

32.5
15.2
14.6
16.7
17. 7
17.3
37.5
25.8
9.1
12.1
20.0
25.2
27. 8
30.5
29.0
2.6

~ ~

§

0

0

S.7 2.02
5.7 2.03
5.7 2.01
5.8 2. 02
5.7 2.03
5.82. 03
1.6 2.42
2.7 3.16
3.7 3.88
6.3 5. 00
2.2 5.98
2.9 6. 68
3.7 7.26
3.9 7.50
4.0 7.50
1.6 2. 28
2.6 3.10
2.7 3.86
6.2 4. 97
2.5 6.20
2.3 6.10
2.8 6.50
3.1 6.68
3.0 6. 97
7.2 5.26
5.4 1. 97
2.0 2.74
2.5 3.12
4.3 4.01
5.0 4.40
5.4 4.60
5.8 4. 80
5.6 4.69
5. 9 4.67

0.144
.142
.143
. 134

:~~~

:~~
.245

.311
. 366
. 413
.458
.472
.480
.147
. 194
.240
.300
.379
.3 1
.39
. 407
.4Q~

.328
.141
.176
.197
.249
.269
. 275
.295
.283
.290

0

-.0

<l

14.03
14.27
14.05
15.10
15. 50
14.70
15. 02
15.20
15.85
16.10
16.35
Ill. 20
15. 7
15.90
15.61
15. 50
16. 00
16.07
16. 51
16.35
16. 00
16.62
16.41
16. 02
16.00
13.97
15.56
15. 82
16.15
16.39
16.72
16.25
16.52
16.20

10.4
12.3
12. 3
11. 9
I I. 3
10.6
0
.4
.6
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2.6
2.7
.4
.8
1.2
2. 1
3. 4
3.4
3.9
4.2
4.3
2.5
1.0
2. 0
2.5
4.4
6.6
6. 1
7.5
6.0
6.5

0
0
0
0
0

88
88
89
89
89

o

88
88
89
9
89
89
9
89
89
89
90
90
91
91
90
90
90
91

g~
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

il2

92

92

92

92
92
92
92
92

62
59
58
58
59
59
54
54
52
55
55
57
58
57

~~

57
57
57
61
61
60
59
61
61
66
62
62
63
63
63
63
63

65

420

530
700

880

990
1, 100
240
330
400
520
650
760
900
1,090
1,250
220
325
410
540
760
760
910
1,020
1,120
640
2.30
310
390

500

610
720
850
1,000
1, no

",

.0

... <'>

2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

..... .

... ...

2. HI
2. 17
2.15
2.1 5
2.16
2.17
2.58
3.37
4.13
5.31
6.35
1.09
7.72
7.97
7.9 8
2.43
3. 29
4.1 o
5. 27
6. 58
6.4 8
6.89
7. 09
6.91
5.3 9
2. 11
2.92
3. 06
4. 27
4. 68
4. 80
5.17
4. 96
4.92

. ... ..
. . ....
..... .
... . . .

1.01
1.00
.66

..... .

... . ..
......
.. . ...
-.. . _ ,

.- .. ..
.. . ...
. .. .. .
"

' . 0.

......
. .....
......
..... .
.. . ...
... . ..
. .....
......
......
•• •• 0.

......
... . ..
. "."

.... . .
.. . ...
... . ..
......
.... . .
..... .
.... . .
.. .. ..
.... ..
.. . ...

CARBURETOR NO.9.
[Aug. 1, 1916; average baromoter, 29.96 inches; gasoline, S. G., 0.683.]
473
474
475
476
477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491

492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499

500

501
502

503

504
505

!
!
!

t
t

t
t
1
1

!

1
1
1

!

t

t

1

!

1
1
1
1

!

i
i

1
1
1
1

0.6
.5
.4
18.7
1 .5
8.9
7.5

12. 8
18.6
6.8
9.1
6.9
9.5
9.9
11. 0
11.1
7.6
13.2
18.8
7. 3
5.6
9.0
10.0
10.0
10.2
10.0
24.5
12.5
17.8
6.0
7. 3
7.3
7.6

5.6
1.0 0.960
5. 3
1.5 .940
4.7
5.1
1.4 .920
19.8 38. 5 11. 7 .493
20.0 3.5 11. 5 .493
12.2 21.1
4.6 1.85
4. 5 12.0
1. 6 3. lI
10.0 22.8
4.7 4.21
16.3 34.8
6.6 5.09
7.2 14.0
2.5 5.95
9.9 19.0
3.3 6.88
4. 0 1. 63
10. 3 16.9
10.2 19. 7
3.3 7.00
3.4 7. 10
10.7 20.6
3.6 7.50
11. 7 22.7
14.0 2:;.1
5.7 1.95
4.6 12.2
2. 6 3.13
10.5 23.7
4. 6 4. 20
16. 9 35.2
6. 7 5.10
2.6 6.17
7.8 15.1
9.2 14. 8
3.4 1. 53
9.7 18. 7
3.0 6. 80
3.6 1. 18
10.8 20.8
3. 4 7. 18
10.8 20.8
3.4 7.20
11. 1 21. 1
13. 0 23.0
5. 1 1.87
9.6 2.6.2
25.2 49. 7
9.8 22.3 · 4.3 4. 18
15.3 33.1
6. 3 5.00
6.4 12.4
2.2 5.60
7.8 15. 1
2.5 6.20
7. 9 15.2
2.5 6. 21
2. 6 6. 23
8.0 15. 6

t~

0. 079
. 079
. 080
. 065
.061
. 172
. 240
.314
. 354

: ~~

.174
. 450
.445
. 455
.186
.261
. 342
.388
.430
. 179
.422
.453
. 462
.463
. 181
. 240
.330
.372
.396
.400
.430
. 430

12.15
11. 90
11.50
7.60

1~: ~~

12.95
13. 40
14. 38
15. 35
16.40
9.38
15.55
15.95
16.65
10.50
12.00
12. 03
13.15
14.35
8.60
16.lI
15.92
15.55
15.56
10.33
10.91
12.67
13.43
14. 15
15.50
14.43
14. 50

10.7
10.15
15.20
9.0
7.4
1. 3
1.7
2.1
2.2
2. 6
2.9
1. 2
3.0
3.1
3.3
1. 5
1.7
2.2
2.6
2.9
1.3
2.9
3. 2
3.2
3.4
1. 6
2. 1
2.9
3.5
3. 8
4. 6
4.4
4. 6

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

87
86
86
86
86
87
88

90

90
91
92
92
94
9·1
96
92
92
93
94
0 94
0 94
0 94
0 97
0
0
0
0 94
0 95
0 96
0 97
0 98
0 98
0 98

~i

:~

46
48
50
44
45
45
45
48
50
48
50
53
56
51
46
47
48

~~
51
50
51
52
54
47
50
50
49
52
58
54

220
320
400
170
140
210
340
450
560
680
840
180
960
1,070
1,240

220

350
40

600

720
175
B50
980
1,090
1, 260
205
310
490

600

700

880

1, 000
1,130

2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

3

.... ..
.. .. ..
......
... ...
.... ..
.. ....
... ...
.... ..
......
... .. .
... .. .
.. ... .

3 . . ....
3 .. . ...
3 ......

3 ... . ..

3 . ... . .
3 ......
3 ......

3 ......
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

......

......
. .....
......
. .. .. .

..... .
.. .. ..
... ...
......

1.04

.65

2.02
3.35
4.52
5.44
6.34
7.3 1
1. 80
7.45
7.55
7.96
2. 14
3.39
4.63
5.49
6. 60
1. 71
7. 22
7. 63
7. 64
7.66
2.05
2.86
4. 51
5.37
6. 00
6. 60
6. 64
6. 66

485

AERONAUTICS.
TABLE

II-VIII.-Log oj carburetor tests, Columbia University, June to August, 1916Continued.
CA RBURETOR NO. 9-Continucd.
[Aug. 2, 1916; barometer, 30.17 inches; gasoline, S. 0., O.6&3. J
-

<n

~

~ "
B.d

Venturi meter.

"
"" . .,.,;
""
.- 0
'"
"'~

"0

"' j:l

.,;

Z

§

p:;

-

506
507
508
509
510
511

-3

,

.S

:~

\!l'
Ci.i

...

,

''''
"

'iO
~~.. ~ ~.~
j:l

"

,..:1

"' _ ...
~
".S ·-.S '-",. ........ p.,
"
p:;
::1
~

~"
00

"""

""

o ~
~ 0

'
'O~

ITempern.
ture, of.

13

-.,.
.~

,, ~

0

.c

-

;:l

.So~ ~ ~. e.S
'"
e~3 ~ ~ ~ ~ fiB ~S
,, 0>
~-e ~ ~ :~~SQ) 'ellA
e:l
~ t:l ~
~l.lS ~ -.o::l _.0
p.,
fi:l
p., ..... 13 0
"

", j:l

'0'-

j:lS

x

'".S

~

:>.~

...
.d.d

~~

~

0

.,

•

~

.,;

., .

to
j:l

~

0,

-0

.

'a
0

o~

j:l's.,

.,;

..... ~

~Z

.~.,;
S'"
::I

-.d

~.~

"

...
0"
""0,

~a

.. .c 2~
.
1:1
"
~...,
0<
~
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - ' - -- - - - - - - - -

!

1:.00.,8

Q .-

I

5.7
11. 5
1. 8
10. 6
6.0
7.0

9.2
14. 0
5.7
13.4
9.5
10.3

~

~,,~

~

14.9
25. 5
7.5
24.0
15.5
17.3

3. 4
5.7
1. 9
5.2
3.7
4.2

0

1. 55
1. 97
1.10
1.92
1. 57
1.66

~

0

p.,

0.175
8.85
. 1 9 10.42
.125
8.80
.131 10.60
.13V II. 30
.185
2. 00

2.1
5. 8
1.3
3. 5
9.5
9. 5

0
0
0
0
0
0

80
80
81
82
2
82

46
45
44

45
45
46

190
300

llO

240
350
350

~

0-"

,..:10

5
5
5
5
5
5

......

......

..... .
. . ....
......
... . ..

1. 73
2.16
1. 23
2.10
1.71
1. 85

By means of a, stop watch the time required to consume a definite
weight of fuel was determined, and the run was continued until
three consecutive Teadings showed the flow to be steady and the rate
of flow constant.
In general each carburetor was tested for five different throttle
positions, including idling and full throttle, and at a sufficient number
of engine speeds at each throttle position. Whenever the readings
showed that the critical pressure had been reached, so that an inarease in engine speed would not produce an increase of flow, the
throttle was changed to its next position. In each case the lowest
speed was the minimum speed at which the dynamometer could be
operated.
All carburetors were tested with standard gasoline of 62.5° Baume,
and a number of them also with gasoline of 750 Baume. The former
was bought from the Standard Oil Co., and the latter was obtained
from the American Oil Works, Titusville, Pa.
The following carburetors, all modern compensating forms, were
very kindly loaned by their makers for the purpose of these tests
when requested through the National Automobile Chamber of Commerce, but the trade namea are suppressed for obvious reasons.
Mark No.

Diameter
of outlet.

1. ....... .. .. . , .. .... .... ... . .

I nche.!.
I N'

2 .... .. ........ ... .... ... .... .
3 .. • .. . .. . .... .... ............
4 • .•. •.•••• •••• • .•••• •. •..•• . .
5 . .•. ..•.. ...... •.•...••... . ..

(1)

It

1-.'.
Ii

New
class.

13.5
13. 4
12.5
6. 5
12.5

Mark No.

6 .. .... .... .... ..... . ... . ... .
7 .. .. _.... _._ . . .. _. '_ " ____ '_
8 .. .. . . ... .... ......... . .... .
9 .. .. . •. . .. .. . • ... ..... .• ....
10 ... . . .••. • •...•.•..•.. . ••••.

Diameter
of outlet.
Inche'.
1'1

Ii
I~

at

ew
class.

14.1
8.2
12. 7
10. 9
9.2

It had been the intention to test two other makes of carburetors,
but, although promised by the makers, delivery was not made.
It is most import ant that the results of these tests be not misinterpreted, and it must be emphasized again that the tests should
not be consldered in any way as competitive. In the first place, only
one f eature of each carburetor was brought out, namely, the accuracy of the proportioning of the mixture at different flow rates, and
this does not throw any light on the intimacy or homogeneity of the

486

AERONAUTICS.

mixture, its density, or its degree of dryness. But even with respect
to proportions the results should be quoted or considered only in
so far as they tend to reveal the characteristics of the variations
from constancy with reference to flow rate for the general sort of
carburetor under study. No attempt was made to improve the performance of each carburetor after the object stated had been attained. For instance, where a carburetor has separate adjustments
for each throttle position, as in one well-known type, the adjustments were not continued after the plotted curves of the results had
shown plainly what might and what might not be effected by further
adjustment. In the same way, where the auxiliary air supply is
regulated by spring-loaded valves, no attempt was made to find the
effect of different springs or spring tensions, since it is well !mown
what effect a lighter or heaVIer spring or a change in the initial
tension will produce.
Furthermore, since all carburetors showed an appreciable variation in the proporti ns of the mixture .under widely varying conditions it is not important that the whole proportionality range of
one is lower than the whole range of another over the same range
of flow rates. Obviously the flow rate range is a matter of option
in use.
Where a carburetor has an independent arrangement for idling
controlled by the throttle position or the vacuum above the throttle,
so that it really consists of two distinct carburetors with separate
jets, the idling mixture was not very carefully adjusted, since this
is a manual operation and its result quite independent of the automatic compensations over the working ranges of flow rates. Whenever an individual result was obtained that seemed inconsistent the
run was repeated, and errors in ca1culations or readings were thus
quickly found out and eliminated during the progress of the test.
Under these conditions and considering the methods and apparatus
used the final results should be correct within 1 per cent.
The proportionality results for each carburetor have booen plotted
in three different ways:
(A) R atio of air to gasoline by weight as ordinates, plotted
against total weight of mIXture as abscissre, designated by the letter
"A," on the curve sheets.
.
(B) Same ordinates as in the previous case, plotted against the
total pressure drop across carburetor as abscissre, designated by the
letter" B," on the curve sheets.
(e) Weight of gasoline as ordinates, fclotted against weight of
air as abscissre, designated by the letter 'e," on the curve sheets.
Where two kinds of gasoline were used sheets marked A, and A2
and e, and e 2 will be found , the subscript 1 denoting the heavier
fuel and 2 the lighter. B was plotted only for the heavier fuel,
since it does not help the understanding very much; SO B only will
be found.
The throttle positions are marked by numbers. (See any A or B
sheet.) These numbers were assigned for convenience only and give
no indication as to the degree of throttle opening. By means of
these numbers and the corresponding symbols the points of a group
can be kept together and recognized; also it will be easy to find the
corresponding reading on the log sheets where the same numbers are
used.

---

----

------------------------------------------------------------------

AERONAUTICS.

4 87

On the C sheets no numbers are used, and the points of anyone
group have simply been given a ch aracteristic mark, which does not
necessarily agree with the symbols of the same group on the A and
B sheets. Since the C curve has only been used to give an idea of
the general nature of the mean curve of all results, this discrepancy,
which was discovered too late, does not matter.
It should also be noted that where two tests were run on one
carburetor no attempt was made to test it with exactly the same
t hrottle position in both cases. Since the tests had to be run on
different days and the carburetor was removed from the box between
the two tests, and because in some tk'ottle positions even the very
slightest motion of the throttle will affect the flow considerably, the
same throttle positions could not have been reproduced without a
very accurate system of marking) which would have required too
much time.
The individual points had at first been combined into smooth
curves, representing mean values, but this method was abandoned,
since it appeared, first, that it in no way helped the understanding,
and, second, because in some cases results were so erratic that they
could not fairly be represented by smooth curves. Accordingly the
test points are joined by straight lines on the curve sheets.
On inspecting the curves it will be oberved tbat the relation A and
B make the irregularities appear far more conspicuous than the relation C. The latter is the one most commonly used in reports on carburetor tests, which is rather peculiar, since it does not giYe to the
eye a striking picture of one of the main characteristics of the carburetor, namely, proportionaJity, and tends to obscure its variations.
Constancy of proportion of gasoline to air will in each case be represented by strai~ht lines, these being in the relations A and B horizontallines, and m C inclined and passing through the origin. The
relation C has the advantage that its curve furnishes the best means
of quickly deducing the equation representing flow of air, which is
important when the performance of a carburetor is to be investigated in the light of the rational or empirical flow laws. It, however, does not convey an accurate idea of the fluctuation in the
mixture proportions, since naturally a very much smaller scale has
to be adopted for the gasoline than for the air. In this report the
gasoline scale on sheets C is only one-tenth that of the air scale. It
must also be remarked that in all the reports of carburetor tests that
have been found in the literature of the subject present curves of the
relation of C only, and individual points are generally suppressed in
favor of a smooth curve. In the light of these new test results this
older practice seems improper, because it suppresses the very facts
that should form the basis or object of the test.
Each carburetor in turn is described briefly and its test results
reported in curve form without elaborate discussion. A photograph
of the instrument and a sectional or phantom view of its construction will serve to identify the device, full description of which may
be found in the trade literature by those not already familiar with
it from personal observation or use.
Oarbttretor No. 1.-This carburetor has a fuel needle valve cont rolled by an automatic spring-loaded secondary air-inlet valve with
a fixed primary air inlet and is therefore a representative of the new

488

AERONAUTICS.

subclass 13.5. It is illustrated in figure 6, and the results of the
test are given in curve form in figures 7, 8, and 9, which represent, respectively, the relations A, B, and C. Reference to the curves
A on figure 7 shows that(a) The mixture gets leaner as the flow rate increases, or that the
fuel increases faster than the air.
(b) Neglecting the idling points where the ratio of air to fuel is
about 9, the ratio varies from 10.3 to 13.1 over the working range
between 2 and 9 pounds of mixture per minute approximately, which
is 24: per cent on the mean ratio of 11.7.
(c) For a given flow rate the mixture is not the same for different
tests as shown by the disposition of points on a giYen vertical line,
but in general this variation is not very large.
(d) There are certain irregularities for which the only explanation
that can be found is irregular mechanical action or sticking of the
moving parts, the automatic valve, the fuel needle valve, or lost motion in the linkage.
Reference to the curve sheet B, figure 8, indicates that on idling
the pressure drop through the carburetor, which is, of course, the
vacuum in the intake manifold, varied from 11.5 to 14.5 inches of
mercury, and over the working range noted above from 0.8 to 9.7
inches of mercury. Finally, reference to figure 9, the plot of relations C, giving the fuel weight with reference to air weight, shows
far less clearly the variations in proportion that r eally exist than
does figure 7, the plot of relations A, which gives the ratio of air
to fuel directly as a function of mixture flow rate.
The curves could have been made to change in shape or curvature
by a change of spring or spring tension, but there is no indication
that a straight line would result or that the irregularities would disappear.
Observations of the level in the float chamber showed that it varied
0.55 inch o,er the flow range, which is large in proportion to the
height of the fuel nozzle above the mean level and must account for
some of the variations.
Oarburet01' 11'0. 13 (fig.l0).-In the carburetor the fuel needle valve
is throttle controlled by a link connection, and air enters partly
through a fixed primary and partly through an automatic springloaded valled secondary inlet, so that it may be regarded as an example of the new s1;l.bclass 13.4. An interestIng comparison becomes
possible between the results of this and those of carburetor No. I, because the two devices are, in general, similar in all respects except for
the needle-vahe control, which is here throttle actuated and in the previous case moved by the automatic secondary air valve. It has already
been pointed out that the throttle position is not a prime variable in
flow while automatic air-valve moyement may be and is so, the more
nearly it controls all the air and the more nearly constant its spring
tension. This being the case, more variation from constancy would
be expected in this carburetor than in the la t one for variation of
flow rates, due to changes of engine speed with a fixed throttle. With
such a fixed throttle any changes in flow rate act on proportions in
just the same way as would be the case with a fixed fuel inlet associated with fixed primary and automatic secondary air inlets. If the
compensation for such a combination were adequate, there would be

•

S. Doc. 559, 64-2.

....

re-

I

..... .

FIG. 6.-Carburetor No. I.

489

AERONAUTICS.

Rolio

Lbs.l'ur
L6s.

() d

9

/0

//

/.3

/2

/4

/f

/6

(jdSO//~e

/7

/8

/9

20

:21

~3

22

" iiil>

.

.,1'+

\

\

A
\

r\ '
\

I--'
~

.......
---- fG
,,

, 1
\

I

,'m'

10- ~ ~
I

1

1
I

.,

~

~)

~

/

~

I"'- ~

0-

~ ~ ~

\
\

51

I

p

:.,;

~. ~

r..

. ..

~'

N

• tl
~

:-L

~

1

....

o

..

Fig.T.

•

4:90

.URONAUTICS.

tJ

9

/0

/~

/2

//

•

/#

/.3

/6

/7.

/8

/.9

Z/

20

Z2

2.}

-c
'<.

Ip

II \

'cp

1\

\

./
I' "\
\

1\
~

b'" i<'

+- .

I....

f
+

11'

...

\
I~
\

"

0

~'>

:,>

~

:h ~-:
~

~'f)

r.;. ~

l"l

"-

I

10

Fig. 8.

~

~ -or. ~"
~

. .
,

~

~

,"

~

1<1
~

,~

, , ,

~
~o

.
}:
~

491

AERONAUTICS.

,

....,

iv

'eo.

'-I>

0't

~
Q

t!l

"
~

8

""

~ ~) ~

~

S.

N-

t")

I\)

~~
~ ~
\I

~

Ri, '
Fig. 9.

"

o

492

AERO::q-AUTICS.

no object in adding the second compensator, which is out of action
when the throttle is fixed.
Reference to the curves of air to fuel ratio with respect to mixture
flow rate, the A relation given in figure 11 leads to the following
conclusions:
(a) The proportions' vary widely in passing from one throttle
position to another for a given flow rate along a vertical line. For
example, at a mixture flow rate of 7 pounds per minute the air to
fuel ratio varies from 15 .4 to about 29, nearly 100 per cent in passing
from No.2 to No.5 throttle position. While manual adjustment of
the cam connection between needle and throttle may be relied upon to
reduce this, there is no reason to believe that the difference can ever
be reduced to zero.
(b) The proportions vary also over a very wide range with any
fixed throttle position as the flow rate changes with engine speed as
is clear from the rising trend of all the curves. For example, the
ratio for throttle positIOn No. 5, and flow rate 2.5 pounds per minute is about 14.5, which increases to 29 for a flow rate of 7 pounds
per minutes with the same throttle position. This is exactly double,
or 100 per cent of the lower value and 67 per cent of the mean ratio
of 21.75. Hand adjustment of the automatic air-valve spring tension
will, of course, tend to flatten these curves, but it is not likely that
they can by this means ever be brought to horizontal lines.
(c) The curves are all smooth and the irregularity noted for carburetor No.1 is absent, which confirms the opinion that these irregularities were due to sticking or lost motion of the air valve or its
curvatures. In the present case the air valve is free and the needle
linkage is positively actuated by the manual movement of the throttle.
Reference to the pressure drop curves (fig. 12) will give the pressure
drop or header vacuum corresponding to the several flow-rate and
throttle-position points or the proportions corresponding to them.
As in the pre,-ious case the direct relation of fuel to air weights of
figure 13 clearly fails to bring out the departures from constancy
of proportion as well as the curve of ratio with respect to rate of
flow. (Fig. 11.)
The le,el in the float chamber varied by not more than 0.1 inch for
all flow rates, a negligible quantity when compared with the suction
produced by the air flow. (See fig. 13.)
Oa1'bwret01' No.3 (fig. 14).-In this carburetor, which has a single
air inlet only, a vertical cylindrical plunger, with its axis normal to
the center line of the horizontal air pas age, tends, by gravity, to
choke the air. Thi is counteracted by the pres ure on the upper side
of the plunger, which-due to a small connecting passage-is identical with the pressure of the air or mixture after it has been throttled
by the plunger. The plunger carries at its lower end the fuel metering pin, a cylindrical rod with a tapering groove cut into it. The
metering pin dips into the cylindrical fuel aspirating tube, the end
of which extends into the air passage, and which may be shifted
up and down, thus providing for a hand adjustment.
The carburetor, therefore, belongs to new subclass 12.5.
Figures 15 and 16 show the aIr-gasoline ratio versus flow rate
tor five different throttle positions, figure 15 for 62.5° B. gasoline,

493

AERONAUTICS.

.
0

'..
"

+

#

,,-"

..
0~

..
.

...
~

...
.."'
...

"
Q

"

~

."

r

.~ "
~ ,
~ ~ ~

~.g

~~ ~

"

~

~

~

!:!

..

"-

T

"

~

..

I"

OJ

~

•

.J

4

of"

6

LD~. of ;f[t;'-I"r~ ,Per ;/1illVIIl

Fig. 11.

7

(J

9

IQ

494

AERONAUTICS.

<>
.,

,

~

..•

I"

I

OJ

..
"
...
..

I

-:
I

~

..
..

r:
L

I

..
'"

J
T;
I

~

z
-3
4

~
~

II

5

·

"f.

.
.

"

·
-

·

J

~
I

~

t:
~

I

I

~

"-

~

':l

-

.;

::!

-- -

~

,,'

'"

'",

,

~

.iJ

<9

~

<5

/}uslVe

.,

~;ofl <lcrtJJS CCW:~Nol"-lltclles oFAtel'CU'Y
Fig. 12.
8

/0 '

1/

/

/,J

/

I

,

"

U

•
495

AERONAUTICS .

N

()

'"

.-l\.

"
&'!\

t'l

<>

~

I

n

+

· s

El

'"

1lJ:,

~
~

~'

c:

c::s

')

'" Iif

~

) Lv ~
I~

c::s

.";1

,

l\j

t-

Vi
Fig.f3.

496

AERO}! AUTICS.
J

and figure 16 for 75° B . gasoline, or sheets A and A 2 , r espectively.
An inspection of these curves gives the following results :
(a) From A, as well as A 2 , it is seen that the maximum capacity
of the carburetor should be taken as slightly more than 8.2 pound of
mixture per minute. This evidently represents the point where the
plunger has risen as far as it can, and therefore ceases to regulate,
and the carburetor becomes a fixed fuel-flow area, fixed air-flow
area instrument. Consequently the mixture tends to become richer.
Points beyond 8.2 pounds per minute of mixture will therefore not be
considered.
(b) On A points of group No. 2 to represent the idling position of
the throttle. Evidently the aspirating effect at the mouth of the
nozzle is insufficient at such for flow rates. It is a general practice
to use a very rich mixture when idling, but the carburetor shows just
the opposite, a very much leaner mixture than for higher flow rates.
(c) Leaving out the idling position, the mixture on both A and
A 2 is seen to become gradually leaner as the flow increases, and the
air-gasoline ratio increases on A, from an average of about 14.5 to
about 15.9, on A2 from about 14.6 to approximately 16.2. This corresponds to mean values of 15.2 and 15.4, respectively, or the total
variation in average ratios amounts to 9.2 per cent and 10.4 per cent,
respectively, of the mean ratios.
(d) The discu ion under (b) referred to average ratios. If, howev,er, extreme values, low and high, are taken, A shows a range from
13.4 to 16.4, leaving out idling positions, and on A2 from 10.6 to 16.8.
True, this large variation is due to a few erratic readings, but there
is no apparent reason why these readings should be thrown out.
They are evidently due to the sticking of the plunger.
(e) The gradual increase in the air-gasoline ratio, as the flow increases, could be corrected by a change in the contours of either the
tapering groove in the metering pin, or of the V-shaped bottom of
the plunger, if the curves are to be flattened out.
Curve sheet B (fig. 17) will be discussed, in conjunction with the
B -curves of all the other carburetors, at the end of the test report.
Figure 18 again proves that this method of r epresentation fails
to give to the eye a true picture of the irregularities of the operation,
although it shows the nature of the equation representing the relation between air flow and fuel flow.
The variation in the float-chamber level was less than 0.1 inch,
i. e., negligible.
Oarburetor No.4- (fig. 9Z0).-In this carburetor the attempt is
made by combining two carburetors one of which has a rising ratio
versus flow curve and one with a drooping curve, so as by the simultaneous action to produce a horizontal ratio versus flow curve, i. e.,
a mixture of constant proportions. Or by accentuating the action
of one component as compared with the other any desired tendency
might theoretically be produced.
The carburetor has no moving parts whatever and adjustments
of the mixture can only be made by exchanging nozzles or Venturi
sections, excepting the idling device, which is independent of the
rest of the carburetor and capable of adjustment.
A single air inlet is provided and two fixed fuel nozzles; the flow
through one of the latter is controlled by the vacuum at its mouth,

s. Doc. 559

J

64-2.

FIG . 1O.-Carburetor No. 2.

s. D oc. 559, 64-2.

,,,

..
Nil I'
CI'fH ."

C ·uburet"e l'" No. '3
""""Fl.£.,. <4 "1-'3
FIG. H.-Carburetor No. 3.

497

AERONAUTICS,

L,6s.~;"

Rol/o

LM. (jqs()hize
B

..9

/(7

//

/..l

/.3

/~ .

/6

/,f

/7

1<>-

/B

--

~

/9

2"

2/ .

22 .

J.J

..-<

/

l>

..

lIS"

\ I

,

I

.~[r.

110 ft/
~, !

,
\

l~

\
\

1- - - I-- ~
\

(

(

!

\
\

\

~. ~)

~
I

;.

~

~

'"

ifL

,

Fig. 15.

72805 °-8. Doc. 559, 64-2-32

~
~
~

[)

c,:

:'" ~r

"

~~

~J

,

:>
~"

, , ,

-""
w
,

.,

~

't:;.

,

~
~
~

498

AERONAUTICS.

-,?oho

Ll>s./l/r
L M . VQSoZne

<:.

8

.9

/t1

,1/

/2

/3

/5"

/4

/6

/7

/8

/9

2/

20

22

Z3

...
"

III

P

"-

,

\
c.,
:

,,,, ~

I~ t<f
! -I,

,

-I>

II

rr

1"\

r;.
1\

1

~

\
~

\

1"'-

r- No'
It .'

-..;

,
'I

h

11
/

~
~

III

\

Q)

,
,

:-...

~

p -

~)
~ ~

;j'(,

:"

tl

R\~

~

,

~

~

10

*' ~l')

"'l f<>. IUJ ~F::

~

:

.

~

Q)

>~
~

~

Fig. 16.

ABRONA UTICS.

499

L,6.s.-4/;'"

8

~

9

/0

1/

/2

/.3

Lb.s. 6dSo~~e
/6
/s/7 /8

/4

20

/9

..k

'2:2

2;1

-<~- .-<;

"-

Q.

\bCi"'"

,"

I\)

<.u
~

/

<>t
I>

\
~

r·

,

1
/

,

():)

D::..::,

~

"-

I\)

"W

I

~

10

~

I

.'

,

/

/

~

lll'r.

!

Il.lL
I

I

Ir.- .

Isb

~

Ii

~
~

~ ,,",:\
~
~
~

~

~

~
Fig. fl.

l"

• ,

""'

~

~
I '" 'I/o~

Ij;>
I

I""

"-

r.
I.'

~

~

~ ~

. ..

~
~

500

AERONAUTICS•

..

N

.~

.

C>.

i""1><

v

.

~
~.

~

.11>
G

~

<>-

s
'1

~ I ~)
~ I~

Q

h

~ .

'i

~

tl

,C.,

Q,
0

~
.'1

i\j

LS
Fig. 18.

(,

,

501

AERONAUTICS.

()

"
'. N

"-

N

0-

~

""

)(

~

~~
B

0

+

~

0

1:\'1

~.

~
'1..§

~

0

:1

R

)
~-

~l
0

~

",+
0

Fig.!9.

'II.

'"

502

AERONAUTICS.

while the flow through the other is limited by the amount which may
pass into a well open to the atmosphere under a constant head. This
arrangement places the carburetor into the new class 6.5.
When examining the results it should be noted that the carburetor
is somewhat smaller than the rest of the instruments, as the list at
the beginning of the test report shows. In this connection it may '
be remarked that the sizes 1i inches, 1i inches, etc., as given in manufacturers' catalogues, do not accurately define the actual diameter
of the discharge passage. . Sometimes the actual diameter is less, in
other cases it is greater than the list size, a custom which seems very
unnecessary.
The results are plotted on figures 21-25, and figures 21 and 22
suggest the following comments:
(a) The action of the separate idling device is 'plainly seen in figure 21, where the points of group 2 represent thIS throttle position.
Naturally these points could have been shifted downward, i. e., the
mixture could have been made richer by adjusting screw 0, figure
455. The variation in mixture proportions during idling is, how-.
ever, considerable, between 18.4 and 20.7. This, of course, is not as
important as the regulation for higher flow rates.
In figure 22, group 2, the throttle has been opened a little more
than in test with the heavier gasoline and the main jets have begun
to operate. Still the variation in the proportions is very large, between 13 and 15.5 in figure 22 (group 2) and between 13.8 and 16.9
in figure 456 (group 3) .
(b ) As the throttle is further opened, groups 4, 5, and full, the
action becomes more regular. Conditions in the two tests agree
quite closely. In each case the mixture gradually becomes leaner
until a flow rate of about 4 pounds per mmute is established. Between 4 pounds and 7 pounds the average remains constant at about
16.4 in each case, and 7 pounds of mixture per minute would seem
to be the upper limit of the working range. At higher flow rates
the mixture again becomes richer.
«(J) The variation in mixture proportions for the same flow rate
but different throttle positions is not large, comparatively, at least,
except for the lower range of flow rates, i. e., below about 2.5 pounds
of mixture per minute. For example, on figure 22, between 4 and
7 pounds' flow, the maximum variation is only 0.7 for an average
ratio of about 16.3, corresponding to 4.3 per cent.
(d) If, however, the intention is to have a constant ratio through
the whole working range, then the results must be looked at in a
different manner. Leaving out group 2 in figure 456, the ratio in
figure 21 ranges from 13.8 to 16.9 and in figure 22 from 13 to 16.7.
(e) The test results for this carburetor are of especial interest,
since it is the only carburetor tested which has no moving parts, designed to regulate the proportion by their automatic operation , excepting carburetor No. 10, which has to be discussed by itself. Now,
comparing all sheets marked "A" it will be plainly seen that No.4
carburetor shows some irregularities and erratic tendencies, especially
in the lower flow ranges, but nothing like some of the instruments,
and none of them can be said to excel No. 4 in this respect. This
again tends to substantiate the claim that those gross irregularities
are due to sticking and binding of the moving parts. That at low-

S. Doc. 559, 64-2. '

N

o

FIG. 20.-Carburetor

o. 4.

503

AERONAUTICS.

L6s.~'"

Rafio

L.6s (ioso.fine
~8

9

#'"

0

/2

/.3

/~

/5

/6

/7

/8

/9

20

22

.Z/

2.3

P- I--==='
~f- I-

.

.

.~

~

!\

,

\

,
'II
I

"

~

~-~
I

I

: Ih
I /

~
I

r.

,I
I
I

I
,

b

~)

~S
......
~

,J
""''JI

f ~

~-

~

~

tc>;

..

f*

"Io~

~

I'"

N

"l

• •, ,
•

-

~
~

> ~.
~.

~

Fig. 21.

504:

,AERONAUTICS.

flo6o
C)

8

9

It>

"

12

1.3

l6s.,4/,A

Los 6 Qs o /;"rr.e
/s

14

/6

/7

/8

/9

22

21

20

-23

'q

\
\

Ii 1'.\
I'k 'i
"\ ,
,\

\>t~

\1 \\
" \t.

.Ur1' ;

,
I
I

\

GJ

,

I
If,

'f
.J.

,

u-

~
~

r..

~)

,)
)

r. +

I:;:

;~.

~': ~

II> ~

~

;>' ~

~

Fig. 22.

r-:

~

,

~

~

~

~

-;l)~

~

1;: )
1

,

b

>

, , :e.
~

505

AERONAUTICS.

Rat/o
8

9

10

II

12

/3

/4

LI>s./fi/'

L.6s.6asohn.e
17

/6

/6'

If!

/(J

20

2/

22

23

R

.....

,
-~

,

.

'"

.Ll

\

I

II

n

"

II
1'---

L/
Iii>

~

1
/

I

~
-(

II

II
I>

b..

~
~

,)

-

l- ff)

I--- .---

r]

'" 1'*
'11"
=1-

-;..

•

'"

..
.• .

15

~. ~

I<'

btl

~

.....

/'J

1:"

'"
Fig. 23.

506

AERON AUTlCS.

N

"-

.OJ

'-l::..

. .<.,

0-

K

;'''1--: ~

0tI

t

+

0

Il>

"'1

::\

"~.
I'"

~
"

,

-"

~

4)

,

'"

~
I

Fig. 24.

r

:?' ~

~

~ .~

"''l

:::;
~

507

AERONAUTICS.

·jM.o/(i(7S(J///ie:lN.fi'M/z.
i\,

(.,

.....

.~

,

-

~

. I!T

(}

"
~

I::!:
G

r<l'l

0

~

0

~ 91~

I~

'"

'" :i

'l- ~ ~

~

I'"
'OC

")

'"

1{
<;J'
I':"

en

Fig. 26.

~

C>

508

AERO:N AUTICS.

flow r ates all of the carburetors exhibit erratic tendencies is not surprising at all, since it is well known from hydraulics that flow through
orifices under low heads is apt to be erratic.
(f) As mentioned before, the curves could be changed in character
by substituting a compensating nozzle of a different size, but whether
the average ratio could be thereby made constant over a larger range
of flow rate is questionable, since for low-flow rates the atmospheric
well must be partly filled with fuel, so that the discharge is not constant. A peculiar" hysteresis" action is claimed by the makers for
this intermediate state of affairs, but this can not be discussed here.
Sheet B, figure 23, will be discussed later.
Figures 24 and 25 show very plainly the general tendency of the
variation in air-gasoline ratio, but nothing more.
The gasoline level in the float chamber varied as much as 0.45 inch
between no flow and maximum flow (see log sheets, pp. 506 and 507),
which seems unduly high, but this large drop took place only at the
highest flow rates where, according to figure 54, the suction at the
mouth of the nozzle rises as hio-h as 64 inches of water, equal to about
87 inches of gasoline, so that the percentage of the total flow head is
small.
Oarburetor No. 5 (fig. f36) .-The carburetor is similar in p r inciple
to J o. 3 and belongs to the same class, new class 12.5. I n this case,
however, the metering device consists of a guided poppet valve" floating" in the currents of air, all of which enters through a single inlet .
The tapered metering pin is stationary and the aspirating tube r ises
and falls with the metering valve, being located in the core of t he
latter. An important distinction, as compared with o. 3, is that
the whole metering pin and the surrounding part of the a pirating
tube are wholly immersed in the fuel, so that a submerged orifice determines the quantity of fuel. The metering pin may be adjusted up
and down by hand until the desired mixture is obtained. A dashpot plunger at the lower end of the metering valve stem is immersed
in the fuel.
Since at low· flow rates the metering valve does not lift from its
seat, small air passages are provided in the body of the valve, as
fio-ure 461 plainly shows, and these passages, leading past the mouth
of the aspirating tube, provide the mixture for running the engine
until the suction is sufficient to lift the valve.
The results are plotted in figures 27-31, and suggest the following
comments:
(a) On both figures 27 and 28 the conditions during idling are
represented by groups 2 in the lower left-hand corners. T he mixtur e
is rich, as is generally demanded, and it varies between wide limits, as
in the case in all carburetors having a separate idling arrangement.
(b) In both tests the general tendency is for the mixture to become
leaner, until the air-gasoline ratio reaches a maximum between 3 and
4 pounds per minute. The mixture then slowly becomes richer, until
at about 8.5 pounds per minute, when the gasoline begins to increase
much faster than the air. This is probably the point where the metering valve gives maximum port opening so that the air inlet becomes
fixed .
(c) The mean mixture for different throttle positions between
about 16 and 19 on Al and 14.8 and 18 on A 2 , but there are some enormous v:1riations for the same flo\v rate at different throttle positions.
Thus, in figure 28, at 1.5 pounds flow, the ratios are 12.2, 13.2, and

1
1

S. Doc. 559, 64-2.

FIG. 26.-Car buretor No .5.

I

,

•

•

,

.

509

AERONAUTICS.

Lbs ~/>
L6s, 6t7so//a.e

Rotio
() 7

8

9

/0

//

/2

/.3

/4

/6

/.5""

/8

/7

/9

.2P

27'

22

" r- '

,

rrr.
~\

,

~

"'

-

[\.

'" '"

,

\

r.,
p-

'\.

-' -'\

f'.,.1\

II
,<

11
,II

,

,
Il/

/,
'/

1/1

,

t::?
~

ti..
f"l

~) t"
~":-

1
/

~

I

I
.~

~)

lI! 'If

ll'"

I'"

""~'l

1'"

l.6

~

~

l.lI!

"l

l'

,

,

, ~

~

l~

., .

~

t'L

~-

t>1

•

~v

8 '
:>-

Fig. 27.

510

AERONAUTICS.

Roft"o

.r

6

7

8

9

/0

/Z

/I

/.J

/4

/7

/6

/5'

/8

<0

/9

'"
--I--'

r-

"'"

~

I

:---.!X

,

1\'
r.,

I

~

,

I

,. .-

'\ I

rc
r-

, I',..
\

,
,

,

~
~.D
I

--

?~

\

./

l/

./'

\

'\

I

1>'
\

'I

\

. ):
r,t

'0'

f.

I. ,

~) ,)

~

I

"'"-

:-.,

~~

,~

,

I'"

I:"

"
~
I

-

~

til

r.
'Ok

~

"I

~

~

~

wN

, , , •

;:>:
~
~

1'>1

, , , ,

~

S
if

Fig. 28.

511

AERONAUTICS.

Ratio
.9

(:)A

/0

//

/2

/,3

/4

L6s.#/r
Lbs vosoli/l(J
/6

/:>

"-

17

-~ ,P

"...

N

/9

/9

-

..20

21

22.

.2 3

:>t

..-I'

\

-"l?I

<.u

f-+ "
\

~

\

I

lh~

~

I

~o-

,,

~

~~

~

,

,
\

~~

'O
r.

~

~~

F

~"-

f.

Il-'"

~
,.:::
~

/

'

~

~~ ,
s-

I'"

e~

~.

~

)

.<:,-

~'"

~

~

0

'jf,~

.1>, -1\ I.u

'II

I~

\
~

Fig. 29.

~

~,

;>.\J

:

I~

'f4~'"

Nt-::

. . • g.
• . .:;.
,

'"
c:::"

~,

~

.

512

ABRON AUTICS.

L &s. o/'6Qso~;Z(2 per M~
.....

1'.

t..

<>,

'"

I-'~

"
~

.
".

I>

~

+"

0

.,

~

~ It\' 11:1
fl'>

~
.)
0

1'8 t>
~. ~

j
I~

"1,'
~

;::

Fig. 30.

~

513

AERONAUTICS.

...

I"

,,~

~

"

'lI.

<>.

"(,

'lI.

!'

"

l>
I

I

"
~
--"
I>

~

+
+
~

x

)<

·t

~ I~~ C:l

)<

§ I~ c>
I~

t'1--

Nl

+

i'l. '>

\.Il

In.

')

II

0'Q

(,

I~

1\.0
Fig. 81.

72805°- 8, Doc. 559, 64-2- 33

514

AERON AUTICS.

0.17 for throttle positions 4,3, and 5, respectively. This corresponds
to a total variation of 4.8, Or 34 per cent, referred to the mean, 14.1.
At 7 pounds flow, on the other hand, in the same test, the variation
for three throttle positions is only 0.75 for a mean value of 16.3, or
4.6 per cent. Only the irregular action of the metering valve, due to
sticking and sluggishness, can account for such discrepancies.
(d) Whether the general tendency of all curves, especially the
gradual enriching of the mixture with increase in flow, is desirable
in a carburetor need not be discussed here. A modification of the
outlines of the metering valve would evidently change the characteristics of the ratio versus flow curve, at least as far as the part to the
right of the peak is concerned.
Sheets 0 1 and O2 , figures 30 and 31, very clearly and much better
than Al and A 2 , show the effect of the fuel density on mixture proportions. More about this will be said later.
The level in the float chamber remained practically constant under
all conditions, a maximum variation of 0.1 inch being negligible.
Oarbureto1' No . 6 (fig. 32) .-As may be seen in the cross section,
this carburetor has three air inlets, one con tant and the other two
provided with spring-loaded automatic valves. The latter t,yO are
interconnected by linkwork, and one of them operates a tapered
metering pin for gasoline. Another spray nozzle is in the constant
air opening and is the only one in operation until the automatic air
valves begin to open. A dashpot pi ton submerged in ga oline
dampens the motion of the automatic air valves. Adjustments for
both spray nozzles are provided. Thus the carburetor is seen to
belong to new class 14.1.
Inspection of curve sheet 0 1 , figure 35, demonstrates that the
carburetor was adjusted for the test so as to give constant average
proportions, since means values are on a straight line passing
through the origin, excepting for higher flow rates, beginning with
about 4 pounds per minute, where the mixture begins to become
slightly leaner. vVhether the a,erage ratio could have been made
constant for the whole range of flow rates by means of the" highspeed" adjustment can not be stated with certainty.
Sheets A and B, figures 33 and 34, however, show that while
the general tendency was to produce constant proportions the ratio
actually varied between very wide limits. Whether it is mechanically po sible to obtain perfectly free motion with so many moving
parts and joints remains to be proven. In the absence of any other
satisfactory explanation the test results would seem to indicate that
it is not possible. This conclusion receives confirmation from the
results of the tests for pressure at the mouth of the spray nozzle.
If these results are plotted to a larger scale than the one used in
figure 56, or if the log on T able IX is carefully examined, it is
plainly seen that the suction increases more or less irregularly with
the air flow, thus accounting for the variations in the gasoline-air
ratio. VVhen the air-gasoline ratio fluctuates in the extraordinary
manner exhibited in figure 33, with a range extending from 11.9
to 17.2, it does not seem to be worth while to discuss mean values, as
long as it is not shown that the excessive variation is not unavoidable
with such elaborate mechanism.
The variations of the level in the float chamber were negligible,
0.15 inch being the maximum depression.

S. D oc. 559, 64-2.

'I<JUtl. .. t,;,.

t

~

., .... 1 \

FIG . 32.-Carburetor NO. 6.

515

AERONAUTICS.

L.6s. ~r
L.6s ~aso/i/le

Rof/o
8

/0

//

/4

/.3

/2

/7

/S"' /6

"

i<>-

/8

/.9

20

· 22

21

2J

>-<

1>:....
-1= PFt

-

-!

.-

l-- ~-

~

"

IT

IIi

I~

R..
i",
~~f.r:

-,

~

, -,

,

/

/1- _
<

J

1

J

,

,
16

1

\

b

~_

i)

,)

I

,It

Il fI, 'Ik ~'Y

I

l"l

-!"~N

'"
"

~) ).~

..

, •

• •

..

~

1'1
Fig.aa.

t\)
~. 1

.---

---

516

AERONAUTICS.

j?ql/o
/()

II

4 2

L hS. ~}.
Lbs. Q.OSO/lae
/-/1

1.3

,

IS

., _"!: --

:

< -:.

16

17

/8

1.9

2()

21

22

~.3

I

--

-

if-

\
/

"

/

-

'.

,

I-

..-

\ \
\

"- .

,

,
II

)
(,

\.

\

1

"'- ........

II
I
I

-4

\
\~

~

~

\
~
~

~J

i!!

I'i

:h .\)

t:>"
PV

•
Fig. 34.

~

I'"

l"l Ii\. .w
, • •

~ ~I
!'J :'.

.

~
~

~.

-, -~

517

AERONAUTICS .

"" tl>-

'"

."

~;;

t
+

-II-

~
.DQ

0

"
"
, cr·

0

f2l 1~1 Itl
~ ~ L1::l

,

Ii-- ~. l§
' ) 1'" I~
~ '.l
~ ~!"
0

l\j

.~

'"

Fig. 35.

•

518

•

AERONAUTICS.

Oarouretor No . 7 (fig. 36) .-In this carburetor, which has a fixed
primary air inlet and a single-spray nozzle, hand adjusted by means
of a needle valve, the auxiliary air enters through ports which are
kept closed by bronze balls, until the suction is sufficient to r aise
them from their seats. After that the balls are kept floating in the
air by the air flow, thus taking the place of springs such as used in
the original Krebs type carburetors, but having the advantage over
springs that the load never varies. This construction places the carburetor in new class 8.2.
.
Comments on results:
(a) According to the curves on figures 37-41, the compensating balls evidently do not begin to operate, at least not effectively,
l.mtil, for this size carburetor, about 4 pounds of mixtur e pel' minute pass through. After this point has been reached the mixture
maintains constant proportions, if mean values are taken, i. e., the
curves representing mean ,alues in figures 37 and 38 are horizontal
lines, and in figures 40 and 41 straight inclined lines passing through
the origin. The range, however, WIthin which all the points are confined is between 7 and 10 per cent of the mean, in some places less.
(b) There must be a point where the balls cease to compensate,
but the curves show hardly any falling off of the air-gasoline ratio.
(c) The suction at the outlet of the fuel nozzle does not increase
with the flow in an absolutely regular mtlIlner as the curve on figure
55 and the log in Table X prove. This, of course, accounts for
fluctuations in the mixture ratio. The only plausible explanation
would seem to be that the balls (there are five of them) which are
naturally not guided, do not act with absolute positiveness, although
they have, of course, the advantage of total absence of friction.
(d) As in other carburetors there is an enormous variation in the
mixture proportions at low-flow rates, and especially when the low·:flow rate is due to the partial closing of the throttle rather than low
engine speed. In this connection see groups 3 in figure 37 and
groups 3 and 4 in figure 38. In the latter case for instance (group
4) the mixture flow increases from 2 to 3.6 pounds only, but the ratio
increases proportionally to the flow from 9.1 to 14.2, an increase of
56 per cent. Group 4 repre ents an almost closed throttle position,
and as the log readings No. 328 to 334 show, the pressure drop across
the carburetor increased from 2.6 to 12.4 inches of mercury. These
conditions would be reproduced by an automobile running on a
smooth road offering little resistance and with varying degrees of
down grade. In an aeroplane engine the higher flow rates would
hardly ever be reproduced. The results show that under such conditions every carburetor tested fails to maintain even approximately.
constant mixture proportions, and that in every case the air to gasoline ratio increases more or less rapidly with the flow . Since at the
same time the suction in the inlet manifold increases, the mixture
should, if anything, become richer to allow for valve-stem leakage
and decreased compl'es ion in the cylinder.
(e) The variation of the float chamber level was negligible with a
maximum depression of 0.1 inch .

S. Doc. 559, 64-2.

.
FIG. 36-Carburetor No.7.

519

AERONAUTICS.

L.6s ~;-.
LbS. 6oso///ze
~

8

.!)

/tJ

//

/.1

/..i!

/-;1

~) ~)

:?

N..

/7

/ 9

~.

/6

/8

~

/,r

.~

Zp

~

.22 '

2.

"
i,.,.c

~
"

i"""t-..

..

'1'
\

1

','l'
,,
110 L·
I
11\
I

I f,

I

I

',
",
I.

I
0-

-

Gl

l'Pp

~

li

~' ~
~

"

~

!I;:
Fig. 37.

IT> I ~ I"
1
"1

'fro ~"'t

I"" I\U IN

t'

, , ,

~
, i
:f

,

.

N
: . ::

~:

520

AERONAUTICS.

I?Cff/o

"

10-0

t-- _
I"

"'"

~
"-

~L\
'~

1\1' r---,
'~- -+

,"'\
1

\

\

f
I

""

\

I
I

-

/

/

~'

I

:::,) )

I""

~ ~

"'~f<i

'f:?
1/

lv

Fig, 38.

~h,
I\)

~Cu

, , , ,
[:!-.

",:->

~

r'~ '~

Cl)

~' ~

~

i::i
~

~

., ,

,

~

~

521

AERONAUTICS.

RatIo
<::.

~

9

/0

II

III

/-f.

/.3

L6s_Vd30//n:e
/S""

/6

/7

/8

/9

2Q

2.3

22

.21

- 'I

Ii l
,If-.
"(

'\

,

r
"
.

Pe tr >-Q
~,

'

~

.

T'

I

Ir.
I

\

\

J

"

\
\
1\
't

i",

1-- "I>

~

~

"
?

'"

~

'" '"

'l'~

:'

1<>, -l> w N~

~,

, , ,
'Ik

•

'<

, , ,

~
~

~~
":

Fig.3S.

522

AERON AUTICS .

"l...

'"

'"

t

"-l>.

"
~. ~

I>

[')

v

1>~1<l>

c

C

"
'%

-+Q

0

"

'"

+

~ I'> ;J
~

"

H::

),K,-.
II

~
~

~

Fig. 40.

.!

~

;0 • •

'I..

"
1
ft

•

,t.t

.':

..'"

S. Doc. 559, 64--2.

..
,

FIG. 43.-Co rburctor No. 8.

•

'I,

' L:,.. .

523

AERONAUTICS.

.....,

:....

.<...,

~

C>.

.....

+
1\)

+

.'

<.u
)<)

x

-l>

~

I"

"" t'
~

/

0.

~ ~) ~)

~ ~

0

~. ~

N:l[li

"

,;"

~

0
I

~

OJ

C;;

Fig. 41.

'J

524

AERONAUTICS.

oarburetor No. 8 (fig . 42).-The principal features of this carburetor are a vertical plunger fitting in a cylinder, the upper side of
which forms a dash port, air openings being uncovered as the plunger
rises, and a tapered fuel metering pin rigidly attached to the hollow
plunger, and dipping into the stationary aspirating tube. The
plunger is "floating" in the current of air, which results in a practically constant vacuum in the mixing chamber surrounding the plunger.
The t est results substantiate the manufacturer's claim of a " constant
vacuum carburetor." As figure 56 and Table X prove, the greatest
difference in suction at the mouth of the fuel nozzle between rrunimum
and maximum flow rates is only 0.8 inch of water. The carburetor
belongs in new class 12.7, and the principal difference between it and
No.3 and No.5 is that in No. 5 the whole metering pin is submerged
in the fuel, and in No.3 the point where the metering pin emerges
from the aspirating tube is in the current of air, while in No. 8 the
latter point is surrounded by air, but this air is dead air, so to speak,
away from the air current, more or less saturated with fuel. The
feature, however, which puts this in a class distinct from No. 3 and
No. 5 is that the t op of the air-tight float chamber is connected by a
small tube to the mixing chamber. The yacuum thus produced on
top of the fuel, however, may be ,aried by means of a hand regulated
air valve which allows more or less air to leak in, thus partially
destroying the vacuum and regulating the fuel flow. By means of
an adjustable collar supporting the plunger "hen at rest, the opening
of the fuel ports is given a" lead" with respect to the air ports which
results in a richer mixture for idling.
Discussion of results (see figs. 43,44,45) :
(a) The effect of the idling arrangement above described is plainly
seen in figure 43 where the points of group 2 represent the idling
position.
(b) Figures 43 and 45 show that the mixture gradually becomes
leaner as the flow increases, up to about 8 pounds per minute mixture
flow. At this point apparently the plunger has reached the limit of
its travel, and the carburetor becomes a fixed air-inlet fixed fuel-inlet
carburetor which accounts for the mixture becoming richer. Eight
pounds represents, therefore, the limit of the working range unless a
richer mixture is desired at extreme engine speeds in order to obtain
maximum power for racing or whenever maximum engine power is
desired.
(c) Between 2 and 8 pounds per minute mixture flow, the air-fuel
ratio increa es from Ig to 16, an increase of 33 per cent, or a variation
of 28.6 per cent referred to a mean ratio of 14. This general tendency
can, in the case of this carburetor, be changed only by substituting a
metering pin of different contours.
(d) If one were to omit about six erratic readings, the results
would be very good, even excellent, as far as constancy of proportions
for anyone rate of flow at different throttle positions is concerned.
What right anyone has, however, to omit inconvenient readings is
not evident, as long as no experimental error can be shown. Again
occasional binding of the plunger is the only plausible explanation.
The special test plotted in figure 56 does not give any indication of
irregularities in the plunger action, but that can not be considered as
conclusive unless a great many readings were taken.

525

AERONAUTlCS.

fi': /-'
,
~

8

.9

/0

//

/.2

/.3

~

Los ,/J/'r
(j<7so;;~e

/'0 LiSs ,

/4

/6

/.$"

/7

/8

/9

20

<3

.2.2

.21

I<Il; P- I<><

\

"

I\,
t-~

"

"I'

I!
II'
h IV

,\

1'\\

I~ .

"L" "\

\

-I~ \.¥

1 f-.;.,
'1
\

\

II?
\

\

\!,

--

I

-:Jl=

2'

,) ~

r-

iO,

:>ar- _
'~

j,

~

~

-p

'\~'"

N

I:::-!..
1

....

~

Fig. 43.

,

~ 'f<
~

,

~ ~

;: .

::

~

,

., .

r'!:-

fl'
~

:t'

526

AERON AUTICS.

D

LJ,s. ~-;' - - .

P

."oao .-L6s. GosoJ~e
, (J

9

;d

//

·")Z

~

"

/~

/-1

/3

.[

.

/7

/8

/9

20

-2/

. 22 ~ 23.

-.

r'

t-

/6

...r.r p:'p

,.

"'
I"... f"'"

....

,

-I£-. lE

"'-.
l'-.

I

\

·1- f-

I,

f
.~

IQ
I?
Q

ro

~)~

r"

{

L......_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

I'" '"

Il' I ~ '" ~
I - I'" rv

~

Pl

, , , ,

'"

~'1

r-::
18.
~

, , ,

,~

;::-:~

Fig. 44.

_

_ __

527

AERONAUTICS.

"-

0
c..

;"

o~

<.

Ij:,

Lo.

il-

:I>-::
~

+

x

0

"

to ~

~
~ ~ £
i ' ~o
f) ,..

}l_
~'\

"
~

"l

0
G>

F;g.45.

528

ABRON AUTICS.

(e) Since this is a carbur etor in which the deflection of the current,
due to the throttle position, can not possibly have any effect on the
fuel flow (see fig. 42), and since the great differences in some of the
other carburetors can only be due to the deflection by the throttle, the
fact that the ratios for different throttle positions at the same flow
rate agree quite closely, assumes considerable significance, but further
investIgations are required before this question can be conclusively
settled.
(f) The nriations in float chamber level were practically nil.
Carbureto1' No. 9 (fig. 46) .- This carburetor has a small fixed
area Venturi tube for the air inlet with a fixed area fuel spray nozzle,
the flow through which may be adju ted by hand by means of a submerged needle valve. In addition it has a fixed area sprar nozzle
located under the hinged flap of a spring loaded auxiliary ail' yahe.
The secondary nozzle, therefore, does not act until there is sufIlcient
suction to open the alL~iliary air valve. This arrangement places
the carburetor in new class 10.9.
Discussion of test r esults (see figs. 47,48, and 49).
(a) The prints of group 2 (fig. 47) represent the idling position
of the throttle, and again-the same as in other carburetors-a great
variation in the mixture proportions is to be found. The air-gasoline ratio increases from 7.6 to 12.1.
(0) In the other throttle positions a distinct break occurs at a
flow rate of about 2 pounds per minute. It must be concluded that
this represents the point at which the auxiliary air valve and the
secondary jet begin to affect the mixture.
(c) The air-gasoline ratio steadily increases at a lmiform rate
from about 10.5 at 2 pounds flow (fig. 47) to 16.6 at nearly 8 pounds
flow , but between 1.7 pounds and 2.1 pounds it increases from 8.6
to 10.5, an increase of 22 per cent for an increase in flow of 23.5
' per cent, while between 2 and 8 pounds, the ratio increases 58 per
cent for an in crease in flow of 400 per cent. A change in spring
tension should enable the operator to reduce this excessive increase in
the ratio, but the location of the secondary nozzle under the tip of
the flap valve and close to the wall produced very curious and erratic
results when the attempt was made to correct the adjustment. Lack
of time prevented further in,estigation, but thel'e is no doubt that
the carburetor as furnished could not be adju ted to give a constant
mi:'...1;ure at different flow rates, e,en for a single throttle position.
What effects the substitution of another spring or of another secondary nozzle or the shifting of the point of the latter by bending
the tube might produce, would be idle to discuss on the basis of
theoretical considerations only.
(it) With the exception of only two or three readings the carburetor showed no irregular tendencies, and the ratio vs. fl ow curves
(fig. 47) are fairly smooth, indicating that the auxiliary valve, the
only moving part, worked freely.
(e) Regarding constancy of proportions for anyone flow r ate
when passing from one throttle position to another, it may be noted
that at 2 poun ds per minute flow the ratios agree within 4 per cent
of the mean, at 4.5 pounds within about 7 per cent, and at 7.5 pounds
within less t h an 4 per cent of the m ean r atio. These differences are

I

'.

s.

Doc. 559,64-2.

EXHAUST

GAS
HEAT
INLE1

FIG. 46.-Carburotor No.9.

529

AERONAUTICS.

Ro/-/o
<> 7

8

..-

It)

.9

~

-

"
't-'N

r-.::

-

II

LDS. VQSp/l/ze

/2

13

/0

I S"

/7

/8 ·

/9

217

21

2.2

~

-., 1>1'

'lj'

\\

"

,

,

,

\\

'[

'.
-I>.

1-1

'

,

'.

'\

I

,
,

~\

~

1\, .

\

"

'",

\\
\

."

\

,

l!ojr-

D

.-'
\

"~

,

~

,

V

~ !)
~

I'
~

.~

:>'

.... I ... r",
~ ~ ~

:~

, , , ,

il

'"

;;"'ll.

iti.

().<O

II>

I'h

~
I) .

Fig. 41.

72805°-S. Doc. 559, 64-2- 34

,

.

,

~

,~

~

530

AERONAUTICS.

/?(d/o

L.6s. /tr
..Lf>s- 6osou/u:.

() 8

"

/C

9

~

' I-

\

//

12

/.>

/#

/3

/6

/7

/8

2C

/9

2/

22

23

-l:<': -

• r- t-

-0{

~,

I'-

"

f"-

'

-

,

-h
I~' I~

-

-

bi'

,

'.

"
,

::::

\

"'-

~

-....

-'.
9

~

~

~

~~

~

t-<.
th

"
~

~'"
'Il
'0

~
Iv

~

Fig. 48.

"~

'1i\

~,

-I I'" I'" IN

t'.

,

,

I~

.

, , ~.

.,

1)'-

,

D

I

531

.A.ERON A UTICS.

fS

,

'tu

N,

(.

0-

\,

""

'"

0

:!t,
I

I>
(.,

o t> '

"I

+
~

'"

l1~

9'

?-II)

'I

~ ~ c:

0
<+

t)' ""
~

r'\ ""

IC<'

I;::;
W

Fig. 49.

c

532

AERON AUTIOS.

to be ascribed to the disturbing action of the throttle which must
be quite pronounced in the case of this carburetor. (See cross section
in fiR' 46.)
(f) No variation in the float-chamber level could be observed.
Oarburetor No. 10 (fig. 50) .-In this carburetor the fuel issues
from a number of very small holes, and a cylindrical rotary throttle with suitably shaped ports uncovers the fuel openings one by
one, so the carbureter may be said to consist of a number of carburetors, each with a fixed air inlet and a fixed fuel inlet. Thus it
comes under new class 9.2. An adjustable damper plate in the air
passage provides hand regulation of the mixture.
Discussion of results (see figs. 51, 52, and 53) : From the construction of the carburetor one would expect to find on sheet A (fig.
51) five quite similar curves, sloping gradually, even if slightly only,
downward as the flow increases. The actual results as shown are
disappointing as well as puzzling. Beginning with a closed throttle,
the first posi tion is represented by No.2, the next by No. 3, and then
No. 4, No. 5, and full throttle follow in the order given. Leaving
aside positions No.2 and No.3 which represent very small flow rates
only, and which show enormous variations in ratios, between 13 and
23 in one case nnd between 15.5 and 18.3 in the other, as was expected
from the experience with the other carburetors, it might be possible
to draw curves r epresenting menn valnes, and the:3e curves would be
approximately parallel, and slightly sloping downward, but the
fluctuations are so large, with the exception of group No.5, that it
seems idle to speak of general tendencies in mixture variation. It is
especially striking that even the full throttle test which usually furnishes the most r egular curves, in this case gives very erratic results,
with successive ratio readings of 19.1, 16.5, 19.4, 18.2, 15.8, 15.9, 15.9,
15.6. Of course if the 19.4 and the 18.2 readings at 4.3 and 5.1 pounds,
respectively were lowered to abou t 16, the r esults would at once show
a most radical improvement, but there is no justification for any such
procedure. A satisfactory explanation for the erratic readings given
by this carburetor does not suggest itself,
The depression of far float chamber level was 0.2 at the higher flow
rates, not sufficient to a{fect the flow appreciably.
Special tests.-After the completion of the r egular tests, each carburetor was subjected to a special test the object of which was to ascertain the vacuum at the outlet of the spray nozzle for the whole
range of flow rates. For this purpo:3e the connection between the
spray nozzle and the float chamber was plugged with plaster of Paris
and the same was done with any outlets to auxiliary wells, etc., so
that a manometer connected to the gasoline passage leading to the
spray nozzle would r ead the actual pressure at the mouth, 1. e., the
vacuum ',hich, with the float chamber head at the other end of the
fuel column, determines the flow. The throttle was kept open full
for these tests and air was passed through the carburetor and metered
the same as during the regular tests.
The log of these tests appears on Tables IX and X and curves
plotted from these readings, on figures 54-56.
These results, together with the reading of the regular tests, may
be used for deducing an empirical formula for the flow in each car-

~

[

533

AERONAUTICS.

buretor, or for trying such formulre as have been proposed for this
purpose providing thn t the exact flow area for each flow 1':1 te is determined which is not an easy matter especially for the fuel passage,
and where metering pins are used. The air flow, however, can not be
calculated from these readings, since in general they do not represent
the true static pressure of the air, and of course when air enters
through auxiliary valves, even the true pressure at the primary nozzle would not be of any use by itself
TABLE

IX-X.-Log of carburetor tests , Columbia University, June to Avgust, 1916.
CARBURETOR NO. 1.
[Aug. 2, 1910; average barometer, 30.17 inches.)
Venturi meter.

Run
No.

P ressure at
VenHeight, turi
Size, Left. Right. inches inlet,
inches.
water. inches
water.

TemperSuction at
RevoluPounds
mouth of
Pressure sture at tions per
carbuair per
fuel nozzle,
in box.
retor
minute.
minute. inches water.
Inlet.

- - - - - - - - - - - --- - - I
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

t

t
t

It
1
1
1
1
1
1

4.7
8.5
11. 3
17.7
6.0
8.0
10.2
11.2
12.0
12.2
12.2

6.3
14.0
19.5
32.3
12.2
16.2
21. 0
23.2
25.0
25.4
25.4

1.6
5.5
9.2
15.1
6.2

1~: ~

12.2
13.0
13.2
13. 2

1.4
3.1
4.1
6.2
2.0
2.6
3. 6
3. 6
4.2
4.3
4.3

-----2.30
3.35
3.90
4. 92
5.60
6.30
7.20
7.54
7.80
7.80
7.80

15. 3
21. 0
24.2
31. 2
36.6
41. 0
42.2
43.5
44. 8
46.2
41.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

87
86
86
86
86
88
89
89
90
90
91

210
310
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1,200
1,440

11.3
14.0
17.1
1 .4
22.8
26.2
29.0
31. 1
33. 1
34.0
34.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

86
86
86
86
86
86
87
.5
89.0
89.5
89.5

180
250
330
400
500
600
700
840
990
1,140
1,440

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82

230
330
480
600
720
860
750
980
1,080
1, 220
1,350

CARBURETOR NO.2.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

t
t
t
t
t

1
1
1
1
1
1

4.2
5. 3
8.7
10.5
18.0
6.2
8.2
10.2
1I.5
1I.8
11.8

1. 0
2.2
5.8

I

lU I

6.3
8.6
11.0
12.4
12.7
12.7

5.2
7.5
14.5
18.0
33. 5
12. 5
16. 8
21. 2
23.9
24 . 5
24.5

1.2
1.4
2.7
3. 8
6.5
2. 0
2. 8
3.3
3.6
3.7
3.7

2.10
2.50
3.43
3.80
5.00
5.65
6.45
7.20
7.62
7.70
7.70

CARBURETOR NO.3.

[July 27, 1916; average barometer, 29.86 inches.)
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

t
t
t
Ii
1
1
1
1
1
1

4.5
7. 6
15.7
22.8
9.2
12.4
10.0
14.2
15.2
15.6
15.5

1.8
5.0
13.2
21. 2
10.2
14.0
11.0
16.3
17.3
17.8
17.7

6. 3
12.6
28.9
44.0
19.4
26.4
21. 0
30.5
32. 5
33.4
33.2

1.8
2.6
5.4
8.6
3.0
4.5
3. 5
5.0
5.4
5.4
5. 5

2.30
3.19
4.67
5.62
6.98
8.00
7. 20
8.50
8.82
8.92
8.90

7.3
11. 6
9.2
11. 4
14.0
13.4
14.7
14.7
15.8
16.1
16.1

------------------------------------

534

AERONAUTICS.

TABLE

IX-X.-Log oj carburetor

Columbia University, June to August, 1916Continued.

tll3ts,

CARBURETOR NO.4.
[Aug. 1, 1916; average barDmeter, 29.96 inches.]
Venturi m eter.
Run
No..

Pressure at
Ven·

turi

Size,
Y:~t~~, inlet,
inches. Left. Right. water. inches
w ater .

Pounds
air per
minute.

Temper.
SuctiDn at
mouth of
Pressure atureat RevDlu·
carbu· tions
fuel nDzzle,
in box.
retor
=ue.
inches water.
inlet.

rer

--- - - - - - ---- --- - - 34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

42
43

J

1
1
1
1

4.5
7.0
12.3
17.8
23. 5
9.0
10.2
11.7
11.6
12.2

1. 5

4.0
9.6
15. 2
21.5
9.6
11. 0
12.7
12. 8
13.3

6.0
11. 0
21.9
33.0
46.0
18.6
21.2
24. 4
24.4
25.5

1.4
2.3
4.3
6. 2
8.8
3.1
3.2
4.0
4. 0
4.2

- - - - -2. 23
2.98
4.12
4.92
5.60
6.80
7.20
7. 70
7.70
7.80

5.3
9.7
20.5
29.1
41.8
50.3
54.4
59.8
62.5
69.3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

85
86
86
86
86
86
86
86
86
86

200
295
430
520
630
770
850

960
1, 140
1,480

I

CARBURET OR NO.5.
[Aug. 2,1916; average barDmeter, 30.17 inches.8
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54

i

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

4.3
7.0
9. 8
16.8
6.0
8. 3
10.5
12.1
13.2
13.6
14.0

1.1
3.9
6.8
14. 0
6.0
8.6
11. 3
13.0
14. 3
14.6
15.1

5.4
10.9
16.6
30.8
12.0
16.9
21.8
25. 1
27.5
2 .1
29.1

1.2
2.3
3.3
5.0
2.3
2.8
3.3
4.1
4. 3
4.4
4.8

2.15
2.9S
3.65
4.82
5.53
6.62
7.33
7.80
8. 10
8.1B
8.30

14.7
12.5
13.5
13.0
13. 5
14.5
15.6
15.9

16.2
17.5
18.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

85
85
85
85
86
87
87
88
89
89
89

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

82
82
82
82
82
82
82
82
83

950
1,100
1,400

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

82
82
82

225
350
650

200
300

400

500

600
700

800
900
1,000
1, 152
1,440

CARBURETOR NO.6.
[Aug. 3,1916; average barDmeter, 29.94

55
56

57
58
59
60
61
62
63

t
t

1

1
1
1
1

5.0
7.1
14.6
16.6
8.1

g:~

13.2
13.9

1.8
3.8
11. 6
13. 8
8.3
11. 6
13. 6
14.3
14.8

6.8
10.9
26.2
30.4
16.4
22.6
26.4
27.5
28.7

1.8
2.4
5. 1
6.0
3.0
3.6
4.2
4.6
4.6

2.28

~:~
4.78

6.47
7.40
8.00
8. 10
8.26

Aux.
0.4
0.7
1.1
1.5
2.2
3.0
3.1
3. 2
3.2

inches.~

Main .
3.8
4. 5
6.5
6.6
8.4
10.4
10.9
11. 4
11.4

200
300
420
500
650
800

CARBURETOR NO.7.
[July 27, 1816; average barDmeter, 29.86 lnches.)

64
65

66

67

~~

70
71

72
73

74
75

i

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

14.8
9.0
18.3
12.4
7.0
9.2
11.0
12.0
12. 1
12.5
12.2
12.3

14.6
6.3
16.3
9.8
7. 7
10.3
12. 3
13.5
13.6
14.0
13.7
13. 8

29.4
15.3
34. 6
22. 2
14.7
19.6
23. 3
25.5
25.7
26. 5
25.9
26.1

7.2
3.0
6. 6
4.3
2.3
3. 0
3.6
4.3
4.2
4.4
4.3
4.2

1.53
3.52
6.07
4.20
6.10
7.00
7.60
7.95
7.95
8.10
7.97
7.97

4.08
10.86
19.08
13.60
24.45
31. 25
38.10
42.20
42.20
43.60
43.60
42.20

/

82

~40

82
82
82
82

650

82

82
82
82

770
900
1,010
1,120
1,200
1, 240
1, 400

J

/

535

AERONAUTICS.
TABLE

rX-X.-Log Of carburetor te8ts, Columbia University, June to August, 1916Continued.
CARBU RETOR NO.8.
[Aug. 3, 1916; average barometer, 29.94 inches.)
Venturi meter.

Run
No.

Pressure at
Ven·
turi
Size, Lelt. Right. ~~t~;, inlet,
inches.
inches
water. water.

Temper·
Suction at
Pounds
Revolumoutho(
P ressure sture at tions per
sir per
carbufuel Dozzle,
in box.
minute. inches water.
retor
minute.
inlet.

--- - - - - - - - - - 76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83

84
85

86

!
!

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

4.6
8.2
14.2
20.1
7.1
8.5
9.0
8.5
9.7
9.0
9.0

1. 6
5.0
11. 5
17. 9
7.3
9.0
9.5
9.0
9.7
9.4
2.5

6.2
13.2
25.7
3 .0
14.4
17.5
18.5
17. 5
1 .9
18.4
18.5

1.3
2.8
5.4
7.0
2.4
2.8
3.0
2.9
3.0
3.0
3.0

- - - --2. 27
3.25
4.45
5.30
6. 05
6.60
6.80
6.60
6.90
6.80
6.80

7.3
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.9
8.0
8. 0
8. 1
8.1
8.1
8.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4.7
7.3
12.1
15.5
19.0
21.5
23.2
23. 8
24.0
24. 3

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

1.2
3.4
5.7
8.0
11. 0
14.8
16.6
18. 2
18.6
18.6

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

85
85
85
85

86
86
87
87

87
88
88

200

31 o
450
5.50

800

900
1,040
1,200
1,050
1,460
..........

CARBURETOR NO.9.

87

88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96

i

i

1
1
1
1
1
1

4.7
7.2
14.2
20.2
8.0
10.0
10.7
12.0
12.0
12.1

1.5
4.0
11.1
17.7
8. 2
10.5
11. 3
12.8
13.0
13.1

U
.2
11.2
25.3
37.8
16.2
20.9
22.0
24.8
25.0
25.2

1.4
2.5
5.0
7.0
2. 6
3.4
3.6
4.2
4.5
4.5

2.27
3.00
4.41
5.28
6.40
7.12
7. 35
7.80
7.82
7.85

83

84
84
84

200

300
470

600

85
85

86
86
86
87

700
820
900
1,040
1,160
1,440

82
82
82
83
83

210
300
460
580
680

CARBURETOR NO. 10.
97
98
99
100
101
102

103

104
105
106

I

1
1
1
1
1
1

5.1
7.7
15.5
22.5
8.5
11.1
12. 8
14.0
14.1
14.1

1.9
4.5
12.5
20.5
8.7
11.6
13.8
15.0
15.1
15. 1

7.0
12.2
28.0
46.0
17.2
22.7
26. 6
29.0
29.2
29.2

1.7
2.6
5.4
8.4
3. 0
3.5
4.5
4.8
4.8
4.7

2. 42
2.13
4. 65
5.72
6. 60
7.50
8.00
8. 30
8. 32
8. 32

84
85
85
85
85

800

900
1,020
1,150
1,440

As has been repeatedly pointed out in the discussion of the individual tests, in some cases the irregularities in the variation of the
mixture ratio with flow is explained by the irregularity of the corresponding pressure readings, which in turn are due to sticking or
binding of moving parts.
In carburetors Nos. 4 and 5 (see fig. 54) the curves also plainly
show the points where the compensating arrangement ceases to be
effective.
Carburetors Nos. 5 and 8 are intended to be "constant vacuum"
instruments, and the cur ves on figures 54 and 56 confirm it.
No. 3 is also a constant vacuum carburetor, but the spray nozzle is
directly at the point where the throttling take place; therefore the
curve figure 55 shows a gradually increasing suction with a maximum of 3 inches of water.

536

AERON AUTICS.

Carburetors Nos. 1, 2, 6, and 9 have spring-loaded auxiliary air
valves and should therefore show similar relations between mixing
chamber vacuum and air flow . The curves show that all four have
this relation expressed by a straight linge of the equation y=am+b,
where y=vacuum, x=air flow , and a and b are con tants. Naturally,
if the curves could have been continued to the left, they would have
curved off toward the origin, but the straight-line relation holds true
for all except the lowest flow rates.
In the case of o. 6 carburetor separate tests were made for the
primary and secondary nozzle pressures, and the two cunes .show
plainly how the suction at the primary nozzle gives the same results
as Nos. 1 and 2 but suction at the secondary nozzle begins to develop
only when the flow amounts to about 2 pounds per minute; after that
suction increases along a straight line. In the test of No. 9 carburetor the two nozzles were not separated. This explains why the
curve is a straight line, but follows the equation y=a::v-b, i. e., it intersects the zero pressure axis to the right of the origin.
No. '7 (fig. 55) also should give the same characteristics, since in
place of the springs it has the constant weight balls. The curve
shows a straight line only up to about 4 pounds. After that the suction increases more rapidly. This is probably due to the fact that
in this case the pressure read on the manometer is the pressure at
the throat of the Venturi tube rather than that of the mixing
chamber.
The two remaining carburetors, J os. 4 and 10, should, under the
test conditions, give the characteristic curves of a carburetor with
fixed air inlet and fixed fuel inlet. The actual results are as expected,
only the curve for No. 10 (fig. 56) is improperly plotted as a straight
line. Actually it is a curve similar to that of No. 4 (fig. 54), as inspection will show.
The great difference in the practice of the yarious manufacturers
with respect to suction at the spray nozzle desenes mention. Assume
an air flow of '7 pounds per minute, a flow rate which is certainly well
within the working range of all the instruments. At this flow rate
the constant vacuum carburetors have vacua of 2, 8, and 15 inches
of water, respectively, while the others show 9, 12,21,30,32,40, and
54 inches of water, respectively.
SUl\1l\fARY OF T1!;ST RESULTS .

(1) The .tests performed in connection with this investigation,
as has been explained before, were intended only to demonstra,te the
performance of modern commercial carburetors as metering or proportioning instruments. But even with this narrow limitation they
are not complete; they show how the mixture proportions are affected
by speed at fixed throttle and al 0 by throttle position when the
engine is running at perfectly uniform speed. They do not show
the effects of a sudden change in the flow rate or of a change in
barometric pressure or atmospheric t emperature. T ime, unfortunately, was not available for these extra te ts nor for tests sho"ing
the effects of the tilting of the carburetor.
(2) While the method adopted for testing was that of varying
the speed and flow rate at each of a series of fixed throttle positions

S. Doc. 559, 64-2 .

.

'

FIG. ro.- Carburetor No. 10

537

AERONAUTICS.

9

/0

//

/2

'"

/S

/.3

/7

/

/8

22

2/

20

~

J-

i>=i==

- --'"

- hoc b!.t,

.1:/
~

\

I',

.-

\

"
.- pt

\

,
\

I

,

/

II
,

,

,

).<1
I

J

,(

/

.....
I
I
I
I
I

~

.....

~

~\

,.:>

~

::'-..

r.
Ill.

0

'"

~ ["'" r
I~· lil' [N-t'

~

[5-'

t>

~

li

, , ,

~

F,) '1\

I'S
~

Ii
Fig. 51.

, , ,

,
,~

"

538

AERON AUTICS.

./
~

8

0

~

N

R

fi'olio

L bS /#;-.
Los. 6uso///r.e
~

H

M

M

~

Q

,
,
,

N

~

V

_

n

~

-- -- F

-

l.m

- -- ---

-_-r-A

~V

'"

1/
'f."

/

-I>.

"l
/

I>.

'-I

V

" 1\

F'H·

\
1'\

t>

l\

~
(0

V

L

l'!,

l\
..!.

\

()

1\ 1 /
\

~

f7 \

1\

;.

I"

~

["--.

l
~
~

~
~

·N
1\
\
lJ

10

~ 1.-

II)

b-~
lh~
~

.;!I-

,-

~

:
Fig. 52.

,"
I:c--I

. . • s:
... ,

,

~

339

AERONAUTICS.

;..,

"-

.~

.c.,

.~

0-

-<>

"

,

-"
"

iG>

)

..

~

'1

I'"
,

0

I

~

M I ~' t:!
~ 11\ ~

E.
b
0

~.j
~

II">
/00

•
~

'N

Fig. 53.

~

~ ~

~j)

540

AERON AU TICS.

!/ocuum 01 VOS'ot/zfZ Oulk-i.:. /ViI T/;rotl/tl
/ a c,,;es J1/ TIGr'.
C

~

~

U

0

~

~

0

~

~

~

0

~

~

i

\
\
1
\

II
II

\
\

I~

I
I

1\

\

i\
\

+

\

1
\

\

I

\
I~

\

't\

I,

T

r:

G> Q
~

I~

'I/>

")

.. .

:)

~

~

2
~
1

Fig. 54.

541

AERONAUTICS.

0

/0

0

/0

20

.30

40

0

\

\

\

.

\
\

'\

\

.

~

\
t
\
t

\

\
~

'\
\
~

P

[;>

\.

h

p

~

Q

~.

' ,~

Ie--.

~
~ I~
[l'\l

I~

Fig. 55.

542

AERONAU TICS.

JIo,uvm of 6t7S0h~fZ Oullel-rvll1hrotll~
/ncIJes Wole/'
C)

0

/0

:ZO

0

/tl

2(}

0

/0

:20

30

0

/0

\

J~

Il

II

\

It.

1
\

I

1\
\

I

'I

1
\

\
J

IV'"
I
\

1\

t,l,f,

~

~~ l<)
~

lit

::

,*

p '"

0.1:>t:J
:i
>

"t

• j>
ti'~
~. :".

Fig. 56.

AERONAUTICS.

543

and the proportionality plotted with reference to flow rates, one
curve for each such throttle position, it is a perfectly simple matter
to connect the curves representing different throttle positions in
any manner desired. The intersections will give the variation in
mixture proportions when opening or closing the throttle.
(3) Inspection of these curves Immediately raises the question of
carburetor capacity rating in terms of flow rate. There is no reason
why a manufacturer can not rate a carburetor in any way he sees
fit, and there does not seem to exist an accepted standard of capacity.
One report of a carburetor test speaks of 120 cubic feet per minute
as the rated capacity of an 1i-inch carburetor, but no reason is given.
In the light of the results of these new tests 100 cubic feet would
seem to be nearer the mark than 120, since in several cases the compensation begins to fail at about 8 pounds of mixture per minute.
There are many practical reasons for a reasonably definIte and unif?rm relation between flow-rate capacity rating and connected pipe
SIze.
(4) The importance of fixing a limit to the variation in mixture
proportions that is permissible or advisable is also made clear. This
question would have to be answered before the performance of any
carburetor tested could be classified as good or bad, and it certainly
should be known to any prospective user or designer. It would seem
as if no r eal advancement in the carburetor field could be achieved
unless and until the various functions are kept strictly separate. It
does not seem right to feed a 12-to-1 mixture when a 14-t0-1 mixture
furnishes exactly the correct amount of oxygen for combustion. If
the 14-to-1 mi:~:ture does not give as good results in a given engine
as the 12-to-1, the conclusion must be that there are present some
interfering influences, after the air and the fuel have been measured
out. In the absence of proof that constant proportionality in combining proportions is not the best air-gas ratio for mixtures, the
only scientific method is to proportion the fuel and air with the greatest possible accuracy and keep the mixture constant instead of guessing at the answer or arbitrarily making the mixture" a little richer"
or leaner than it was before some operating difficulty was encountered. Then the next step would be to ascertain what is necessary
so that this chemically perfect and constant mixture will give the
best results in the engine.
(5) That there is anything but uniformity with respect to mixture
characteristics of existing carburetors, the curves demonstrate better
than any written comment. Not even the general slope of the curves
is the same.
(6) The pressure drop across the carburetor is synonymous with
the manifold vacuum at full open throttle, hence an important quantity, since it affects directly the volumetric efficiency, compression
pressure, and negative work on the engine. For the same flow rate
(about 7.2 pounds of air per minute) and at full throttle the following pressure -drops (in inches of mercury) were observed: Carburetor
No.1, 2.3 inches ; No.2, 2.6 inches ; No.3, 1.5 inches; No.4, 2.3
inches ; No.5, 1.3 inches ; No.6, 1.5 inches; No.7, 3.3 inches ; No.8,
1.2 inches; No. 9, 3 inches; No. 10, 2.2 inches. These figures in connection with the cross section of the carburetors speak for themselves.

•

544

AERON A UTICS.

(7) Tests on the same carburetor, but with two grades of gasoline,
gave the expected result: T he use of lighter gasoline produced richer
mixtures for the same air flow, but the difference is so small that it
would be hazardous to give a numerical estimate, in view of the
irregularities in proportions.
(8) Considering how little really scientific work has been done in
connection with carburetors, it is surprising that they function as
well as they do, but the road to further improvements seems clearly
outlined.
( B) CAR BURETOR TEST LITERATURE.
DISCUSSION OF THE LITERATURE OF OTHER C..I.RBURETOR TESTS.

In an official carburetor competition arranged by the Prussian
Government, amon& others, the following properties were to be investigated by tests and considered in the awarding of prizes: Fuel consumption of engine, output and flexibility of engine, time required to
start engine after having stood all night in unheated shed, absence
of bad odors, absence of smokiness in the exhaust and of soot in the
cylinders. No lengthy discussion would be as striking as the simple
enumeration of these items if one were asked to demonstrate how
vital a part of the modern motor car the carburetor is; how not only
power and economy of operation but also convenience and pleasure
of driving depend altogether on the carburetor.
When It is further considered that the carburetor art is 23 years
old, as the Maybach carburetor, the prototype of all modern proportioning flow carburetors, was introduced in 1893, it is hard to explain
the incompleteness-if not complete lack-of reliable design data.
One would think that to review all important carburetor tests undertaken for the purpose of furnishing such data would be a formidable
undertaking, but instead of that it must be acknowledged that a careful search of the available literature will disclose less than a dozen
reports of investigations that are of any real value to the designer.
In the discussion of one such paper presented before the Institution
of Automobile Engineers, England, the president of the institution
described the situation as follows (Proc. r. A. E., Vol. V, discussion
of paper by Morgan & Wood) :
In my experience the design of the spray type of carburetor is somewhat in
the same position as the design and fitting out of a sailing boat. Different men
come along and move the ballast to different positions and alter and shift the
sail plan about, here and there, and get different r esult, better or worse; but
none of them get the exact results that the designer antiCipated or know with
any sort of certainty what effect any given alteration will produce.

These words were uttered in 1910, but they are just as true to-day,
with this difference only, that in the intervening six years a greater
number of men have" come along and moved the ballast and altered
the sail plan," so that the results on the "hole are perhaps somewhat
improved, but in the meantime, also, the problem has been rendered
more important, as well as more complicated, due not only to the
available fuel becoming more expensive but more difficult to use.
If the tests made in connection with this report, incomplete as they
are, will serve the purpose of emphasizin& the necessity for more
work, careful, scientific, unbiased wor k, the authors will be well
satisfied.

•

AERONAUTICS.

545

A number of published reports of carburetor investigations which
appear most useful at first sight lose their value, partly or altogether,
on closer inspection. A report which does not give the details of
the measuring appliances and methods by which the readings were
obtained and the results calculated is of doubtful value, no matter
what the standing of the investigator may be, since the degree of
accuracy can not be judged nor can the reader know how far the
character of the results has been affected by the test methods.
In this connection also the practice of publishing smooth curves
only, without giving individual points or the test log, can not be condemned too strongly. Usually, also, in reports of this sort the
curves are extended down to the origin or to zero flow, but no one
can tell how far actual readings were carried, and this just at a flow
region where the greatest irregularities occur. Another procedure
which is not necessarily unscientific but apt to be misleading, and
which has been referred to in the discussion of the tests, conSlsts in
unduly reducing the scale of one of the variables as compared with
the other. This is apt to occur when gasoline flow is plotted against
air flow.
Again, some apparently careful and valuable reports lose some of
their significance when, after all kinds of other devices have been
reported on, the author trots out his own personal pet and shows
how superior it is to all the other creatures. As long as this refers
only to some pet theory exception can not be taken, but when it is
a question of a patented device which is ju t being put on the market
it would seem to be more appropriate to let some one else report on it.
No matter how distine;uished a man me be, no matter how far above
any unworthy SuspiclOn, a scientific test report in which he compares different devices, all in the market and all patented and competing with each other, should not be signed by the inventor of one
of the devices.
Some of the most valuable information has been derived from the
work of British scientists, and the reports which were all presented
before the Institution of Automobile Engineers deserve the highest
praise, although some details may be criticized.
In 1907 Dugald Clerk read a paper before the institution on the
principles of carbureting, as determined by exhaust-gas analysis.
He examined the trials of the Royal Automobile Club. His paper
and that of Prof. Hopkinson, of Cambridge University, in the same
year, are important because they showed how the carburetor performance might be analyzed by means of the exhaust-gas anaylsis.
In Clerk and Burls Gas, Petrol, and Oil Engines, Volume II, page
632, a simple formula for calculating the air-fuel ratio from exhaust
analysis will be found.
Two splendid investigations were undertaken by Dr. Watson in
1908 and 1909. The titles are" On the thermal and combustion efficiency of a four-cylinder petrol motor" (Proc. 1. A. E., Vol. III,
p . 389), and the other, "An investigation of the thermal efficiency of
a two-cycle petrol engine" (Proc. 1. A. E., Vol. V, p. 83) . As the
titles show, they were not really carburetor tests, but since they were
to be as complete engine tests as facilities allowed, both air and fuel
were measured, and the exhaust gases were analyzed. Thus the re72805 °-S. Doc. 559, 64-2--35

546

AERONAUTICS.

suIts, while not dealing with the performance of a modern carburetor tillder all conditIOns of flow (all tests were nill at full throttle
and the auxiliary air valve was fixed), are of the greatest interest
as showing the relations between economy and mixture proportions
and between exhaust gas analysis and mixture proportions. The
tests were deficient only as far as the loading of the engines was
concerned. In one case an uncalibrated fan brake was used; in the
other a belted dynamo, so that in neither test could the brake horsepower be determined. Dr. Watson used an optical indicator of his
own design, and all results are referred to as indicated"horsepower.
The air was measured by means of an orifice in a thin plate, forming
the inlet to a box from which the air was drawn. The primary and
the auxiliary air inlets of the carburetor were connected to the box
by a pipe. A box of 19 cubic feet volume was used, but this was not
sufficient to damp the pulsations of the air, so on one side of the box
was an india rubber dIaphragm. This is a very simple arrangement,
and quite accurate if plate and orifice are made the same as those
used in some reliable calibration te ts, such as, for instance, Durley's
experiments, so that the coefficient is known. It has, however, the
disadvantage that the range of flow which can be measured with
one diaphragm is very limited, since any large pressure drop must be
avoided. This would mean a number of plates and orifices which
would haye to be exchanged when any flow rate between 120 cubic
feet per minute and less than 1 cubic foot is to be measured, as was
done in the new tests of this summer here reported. Of great importance in Dr. vVatson's report are the graphs giving the relation
between CO 2 , CO, O 2 , and the proportions of air to fuel.
Very interesting also, although not quite as accurate perhaps, are
. the tests made by Messrs. Morgan and Wood, and presented before
the Association of Automobile Engineers the same year (1910) as Dr.
W atson's second paper (Proc. I. A. E., Vol. V, p. 37). The purpose
of the investigation was to develop a kerosene carburetor. The
mixture was pulled through an automobile engine, which was driven
by outside power, and then it was discharged into a gas holder for
measuring. A r ather rislcy procedure, it would seem. First, simple
carburetors made up of sections of pipe and spray orifices were
tested, and the characteristics of plain tube carburetors deyeloped.
Then regular carburetors were put under test, single jet with mechanical air valve, single jet with spring-controlled air valve, two and three
jet and mechanical air valve, etc. The final conclusion of the authors
was that a plain tube carburetor with fixed fuel nozzle of the right
proportions could be combined with a constant rate of flow nozzle
so as to produce a mixture of constant proportions. This would lead
to a type of carburetor similar to our No.4. Examination of the
curves will show that most of them are quite irregular, although the
general tendency may be evident. The individual points are given
only on some of the plots. The tests were made at full throttle.
Important, too, is the statement, which should be obvious, but does
not seem so to many people, namely, that the tests when reproduced
with the engine running under its own power gave exactly the same
results.
In the discussion of this paper reference is frequently made to
" surging flow" in the suction pipe, organ pipe effects, which possibly
might affect the results.

J

AERONAUTICS.

547

In the Zeitschrift des Vereins deutscher Ingenieure a number of
accurate and complete engine tests have been published from time to
time, and Prof. Riedler, of Charlottenburg, has carried on a great
many interesting engine investigations, but no special carburetor
investigation has been found in the German technical literature except
t wo. One, of course, is Prof. Rummel's, Aachen, Germany, famous
in,estigation, which correctly has been called a classic of carburetor
literature. Prof. Rummel conducted an extensive series of tests
covering a period of three years to determine the la\Vs of flow from
carburetor nozzles. The results were first published in Del' Motorwagen in 1906, and lately have been published in translation by
Horseless Age, April 14, 1915. Since these experiments \Vere not
made on actual carburetors, but on nozzles only, and not in connection
with an engine, they are reviewed in connection with the discussion
of flow laws.
The same procedure has been followed in the case of R. W. A.
Brewer, whose work would have been reviewed, together with that of
the other British investigators, if it had not principally dealt with
the establishing of flow laws based on the experiments of others and
himself. E. Sorel's, the French engineer, valuable contributions are
also treated in the last chapter.
Returning to carburetor investigations carried on in Germany,
we find one and, as far as is known to the authors, the only instance
where an attempt was made to determine the actual performance of
existing commercial carburetors by means of unbiased competitive
tests. These tests were undertaken by a commission appointed by
the Prussian Government for the purpose of finding the carburetor
best suited for benzol fuel. Money prizes were offered, and 14 carburetors were entered. A description of the test methods and of
the prize-winning carburetors will be found in Del' Motorwagon,
May 31, 1914, and Horseless Age, volume 33, page 640. Unfortunately the actual results, which must be of extreme interest, have
apparently neyer been published, probably due to the outbreak of the
war. Nevertheless, it seems appropriate to call attention to the test
conditions in view of the desirability of undertaking similar work in
this country.
The tests consisted of two parts, a laboratory test and a road test.
The bench tests were run in the laboratory of the Technische Hochschule, Charlottenburg, where the carburetors had to be attached
to a pleasure car engine and a truck engine, all carburetors, of course,
being tested on the same two engines. The points on which the carburetors were to be judged in the bench test were : (a) Maximum
power; (b) fuel consumption at maximum power; (c) consumption
when throttled, at R. P. M.=1,400; (d) consumption when throttled,
at R. P. M.=800; (e) lowest R. P . M. at full load; (f) lowest idling
speed; (g) fuel consumption when idling; (h) flexibility under sudden changes of load. \Vhether the order also represents the order
of merit in judging is not clear. The exhaust was analyzed by Orsat
apparatus. Also determined were the volumetric efficiency of the
engine, cooling water temperature, humidi.ty of the air, temperature
of the air. All results were reduced to normal barometric reading.
It was found that one of the leading carbul'etors could be used either
on gasoline or benzol fuel without any change whatsoever. A route

548

AERON AUTICS.

extending over several hundred miles was laid out for the road tests.
The points for the latter (partly quoted at the beginning of the chapter) were as follows: Consumption of benzol; output and flexibility
of engine; time required to start engine after the car had stood all
night in an unheated shed; absence of bad odors, of smoke in the exhaust, or soot in the cylinders; accessibility of internal parts; rapidity of conversion for operation on gasoline; and consumption of
gasoline over one stage that had already been driven over on benzol.
Who can doubt that a competition of this sort properly conducted
will be of incalculable benefit to the state of the art not only but to
the whole industry~ One only has to think of the stimulus given to
the aeroplane-engine industry by the competitions that were held by
the ,arious European Governments and associations.
Coming now to the experimental work done in this country, we
find that many have tried earnestly enough to solve the great mystery, but the net results, as far as the advancement of the art is
concerned, are deplorably deficient. This statement, of course, refers
only to the results published and not to the experimental work which
has been carried on by the carburetor and automobile manufacturers
and in private laboratories, and about which nothing is officially
known. A great many indi,iduals have experimented on carburetors, but in most cases either the mental equipment and scientific
training of the investigator or the mechanical equipment for the
carrying out of the tests, or both, were wholly inadequate to the task.
No wonder then that men would come to such conclusions as this:
"The investigation furnished convincing evidence that combustion
is entirely without law; in other words, that it is an empirical phenomenon and to be treated as such."
A few of the serious investigations which have been found in the
trade literature and proceedings of societies will now be briefly
reviewed.
C. H. Taylor published in Horseless Age (Mar. 4, 1908) the results of tests made by him in order to determine correct mixture
proportions for different engine speeds and throttle positions. The
report is quite complete and great care apparently was used in order
to obtain exact results, but the test equipment can not be accepted
for a scientific investigation. The air was measured by means of an
ordinary gas meter and the gasoline determined from the number of
revolutions of a calibrated small triplex pump driven from the engine by friction drive. The gasoline pipe was heated by a blow torch
and the supposition was that the gasoline entered the air pipe in
vapor form. A two-cylinder automobile engine was used for the
tests.
D. S. Tice undertook some experimental work described by him in
Horseless Age, August 19, 1908, for the purpose of establishing definitely just what law or laws are followed by the discharges of several
nozzle forms in actual use in carburetors. The nozzles, actually
taken from carburetors, were tested by themselves, actual conditions
being reproduced as far as possible, with the engine suction replaced
by an aspirator. Gasoline flow is shown plotted against pressure
drop. The air flow is calculated from theoretical formulre without
using a coefficient. In his conclusions Mr. Tice proposes in place of
the automatic air valve as one means of compensation, "a jagged

AERONAUTICS.

549

piece of metal placed in the fuel passage in such a way that it presents a great frictional resistance to the flow of the liquid at high
velocity, thus reducing the nozzle efflux," which is rather interesting
in view of the fact that a similar method has lately been not only
proposed but actually introduced in a carburetor. More about this
will be found in the discussion of flow laws.
J . S. V. Bickford (Horseless Age, Dec. 2, 1908) constructed experimental carburetors out of glass lamp chimneys and nozzles and measured the air by means of a homemade gas holder consisting of a tinplate bell and a water barrel.
Mr. Tice's and Mr. Bickford's tests ,yere used by H . L . Hepburn
(Horseless Age, Apr. 14, 1909) as the basis for calculations on the
carburetor problems.
A paper was read in 1912 before the American Society of Mechanical Engineers by George W . Munroe describing the tests he made on
six commercial carburetors. The carburetors were attached to a new
four-cylinder automobile engine, the load was applied and measured
by means of an ordinary Prony brake. In each run power, speed,
and fuel consumption were determined, but the n,ir was not measured
nor was the exhaust analyzed, so that the results are of no help in the
proportioning problem. Tests were run at 10 different speeds, maximum load for each speed, and then the speed was reduced by throttling, so that the results should give a complete picture of engine and
carburetor performance under all conditions of steady running, but
of course this over-all performance does not assist the designer very
much in tracing the reasons for good or bad results.
S. M. Udale (Horseless Age, Aug. 6, 1913) discussed the method
and interpretation of exhaust-gas analysis in engine and carburetor
t ests. This method was first applied to automobile tests by Dugald
Clerk (Proc. I. A. E ., Dec. 11, 1907), as mentioned before, and undoubtedly is most helpful in the interpretation of r esults when considered in conjunction with air and fuel measurement, but just because the t aking of sn,mples and the use of the Orsat apparatus seems
so very simple, exhaust-gas analysis is a rather dangerous thing.
Only in the hands of a skilled. chemist or of some one who has taken
the trouble to study the subject and knows what to guard against, the
Orsat or similar apparatus will furnish reliable results. It is rather
significant that Mr. Udale in 1913 had to use the results obtained by
Mr. Taylor, given years previous (see above), in order to illustrate
some of his deductions, bearing out what was said at the beginning of
this chapter about the meagerness of test data published.
The technical committee of the Automobile Club of America made
a test of the" Sunderman safety carburetor," which was published
in Horseless Age of October 1, 1913. At various speeds the horsepower and the fuel and air consumption were determined, and the
exhaust gases were also analyzed. A Venturi meter "as used for the
air measurements. A number of runs were also made with the
throttle valve being periodically opened and closed.
Under the auspices of the Automobile a series of road tests were
undertaken, pleasure cars as well as motor trucks participating. The
results were published in the Automobile, February 12, 1914, and
February 19, 1914, by Mr. Herbert Chase. The gasoline was measured and exhaust gas samples were taken at prescribed points of the

550

AERONAUTICS.

route. The results together with the specifications of th e cars are
given in the report. In almost every case the percentage of CO when
idling was very large.
At various tImes Messrs. F. H . and F. O. Ball have contributed the
results of carburetor investigations. Thus we find articles by these
authors in Horseless Age, December 25, 1907, in the same publication
under the date of August 4, 1909, and finally a paper presented before the Society of Automobile Engineers and published in the
Society of Automobile Engineers' Bulletin of August, 1916, all of
these dealing with carburetor investigations carried on by the authors
in their own laboratory. The testing equipment is only vaguely described. An engine with electric brake which could also run as
motor, as well as a steam ejector, were used to draw the air through
the carburetors. What kind of air-metering equipment was used is
not stated except that it was" calibrated and very accurate." Many
carburetors were tested, and the results are plotted as curves with
the ratio" gasoline, ounces per 1,000 cubic feet as ordinates and air
flow in cubic feet per minutes as abscissae." On each curve sheet
the region between be t ratio for high power and best ratio for high
efficiency is shaded, there may be and is, of course, a difference of
opinion about the numerical value of these limits. At the end of
this year's paper a new two-stage carburetor is described and its
performance analyzed. According to the curves it gives an absolutely
constant ratio between 40 and 140 cubic feet per minute air flow. Individual points are not giYen. Tests are also given for a carburetor
with "friction control" of gasoline. By compelling the fuel first
to travel through a long thin annulus of relatively large diameter the
authors claim to regulate the flow so that it will be directly pl'0J)ortional to the head itself instead of to the square root of it, and smce,
according to them, the flow of air in a carburetor with a spring
loaded auxiliary air valve varies directly as the head, constancy of
proportions is assured. An interesting discussion follows the paper.
The results of a diligent search of all publications to be found in
the libraries of New York City are contained in the above review
and it is thus seen that the private inventor or the small manufacturer
who has not the means to install and maintain the elaborate testing
equipment required, has almost no reliable data to help him in his
work. This explains the many failures and disappointments among
the great number of enthusiastic and conscientious people who have
been lured into the field by the attractiveness of the carburetor
problem.

REPORT No. 11.
PART VII.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
By

CH.&.RLES

E.

LUCKE.

1. Carburetor design has not yet emerged from the stage of invent ion and empiricism, but the time has arrived when it is important
that scientific engineering methods should govern the practice in
design.
.
2. There is available a surprisingly large number of different
forms and arrangement of parts constituting carburetor schemes in
the Patent Office records which serve as excellent material for qualitative design, to which the necessary dimensions must be applied
when sufficient data have been established. (See Part IV of this
report.)
3. Data are lacking on air and fuel flow in carburetor passages
necessary for the determination of such dimensions as will insure the
production of a specified quantity and quality of mixture. Quantitative design can not be undertaken until such data have been
established. (See Part V of this rel?ort.)
4. Data are also lacking on the mIxture requirements for engines
to insure their best performance in horsepower and efficiency, which
engine mixture requirements constitute the specifications which the
carburetor must fulfill. (See Part I of this report.)
5. Experimental determination of the relation between the rate
of flow of fuel and the head should be undertaken for all grades of
gasoline, kerosene, alcohol, and benzol in passages of size and shape
suitable for carburetors, and at all rates of flow from zero up to the
maximum used. The sizes of passage should extend from zero
up to values suitable for the largest gasoline engines, which, for the
present, may be set at 500 h orsepower, in round numbers. The effect
of temperature and viscosity must also be evaluated over a range
in excess or what may be encountered in use.
6. Experimental determination of the relation between the r ate
of flow of atmospheric air into carburetor air passages and the
vacuum at any point of the passage should be undertaken for such
sh apes and sizes of air passages as are suitable for carburetors of the
various compensating classes and for all velocities from zero up to
the critical for orifices. The effect of changes in barometric and
absolute pressure and of temperature on the air flow-vacuum relation
should also be evaluated over a suitably wide range with reference
to use.
551

552

AERONAUTICS.

7. The accuracy of maintenance of proportion in present commercial carburetors over working ranges of flow rates and at different
throttle positions is by no means as good as it can be made. (See
Part VI of this report.)
8. Additional tests on the changes in proportion of air to fuel in
commercial carburetors should be made to clearly establish the infl uence of (a) sudden opening or closing of throttle; (b) a tmospheric temperature between 120 0 F. and - 30 0 F.; (c) air pressure
from 10 to 40 inches Hg. absolute; (d) tilting through at least 45 0
from the vertical in all horizontal directions; (e) vibrations of such
periodicity and degree as is characteristic of each typical arrangement of engine parts and for the largest and smallest sizes; (f)
mixture pipe pulsations of the periodicity and amplitude found in
typical manifolds of varying length and for all types of cylinder
grouping.
.
9. Additional proportionality tests should be undertaken on two
groups of carburetors and two types of engines. One of the carburetors should have throttle controlled compensation, and the other
a compensation automatically controlled by the flow rate, independent of the throttle. One of the engines should have a laad or
resisting torque, independent of speed, and, therefore, the carburetor
flow rate will be independent of throttle position, typical of automobiles. The other engine should have a resisting torque that is a
function of speed, and, therefore, the carburetor flow rate will be
more or less fixed by throttle position, typical of aero and marine
conditions. These tests will clear up the question of the relative
value of the two types of load, and especially for the screw propeller load-prove whether or not the throttle controlled compensation is substantially as good as the automatic, which appears to be
necessary fo the automobile type of load. In the test with propeller loads the propeller torque influences introduced by variable
air or water currents must be evaluated.
10. The engine test to be conducted for the purpose of determining
the most suitable mixture specifioations should be started with mixtures that are dry and such as are most easily made by using very
light gasoline af 76 0 Baume or better. With such a fuel the precise
effect of the proportion on both maximum horsepower and thermal
efficiency should be determined for each t ype and size of engine now
in use. Subsequently, heavier gasoline should be used, such as will
yield mixtures with increasing amounts of unva.porized fuel, while
the mixture proportion is first kept constant and then varied so that
the effect of proportionality and of volatility or mixture wetness
may be known on engine capacity and efficiency. Finally, each of
the wet mixtures should be dried by heating and the effect on engine
capacity and efficiency again determined. From the results of such
tests the mixture specifications can be quantitatively fixed as to proportionality and quality and density with allowable limits to give
any required engine performance, and carburetors can be purchased
on such specifications or can be designed to fulfill them, fulfillment
being determined by test.

