• 52 52030

c
TECI~N IC A L

i~ATIONLL

r OTES .

ADVISORY COM:lITT KS F OR

P..E RO~~AUTIC8.

No. 30

DESIGN OF RECORDI NG W
IND TUN NE L BALM!CES.

By
F. H. Norton, Physicist,
Aerodynamical Laboratory, N. A. C. A.,
La~l ~ y Field~ Va.

Dec ember, 1920.

•

NATIONAL ADVISORY COUMITTEE FOR AERONAUTICS
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 30.
DESIGN OF RECORDING WIND TUNNEL BALANCES.
By
F. H. Norton, Physicist,
Aerodynamical Labora~ory, N. A. C. A.
Langley Field, Va.

The fOllowing description of the design of. a reco:cding
"ind tunnel balance was prepared at tne Langley Memorial
Aeronautical

Labo~atory

of. the National Advisory Committee

for Aeronaut ies ~ as the use of sue!: a 'oalanee will greatly
increase the efficiency of operat ion of a wino. tunnel by increasing the capacity of the wind tunnel with a decrea-se in
personnel.
Wind tunnel tests may be divided into two classes: com-

•
•

mercial testing, where great accuracy is not important, but
where rapidity of testing a more or less standard type of model is essential, and scientific work where the tests are of
various kinds and accuracy is more important than speed.

A

balance for the .first class of \,ork need not be universal,
but it should have a means for recording lift, d.rag and pitChing moment, preferably plotting them continuously against
angle of incidence.

The second class of work demands a bal-

ance capable of supporting conveniently any type of model,
and should hold them rigidly even at high speeds.

All three

moments and three forces on the model should if possible be

-- 2 -

recorded simultaneously and pJ.ottect el ther against angle of
incidence or angle of yaw.

It might seem that such an elab-

orate recording mechan .i.sm would be too gl'eat an expense, but
wD.:m it is realized tha"t it v
vould save the t :i.me of thJ:'ee men,
and would at leas t d.ouble the capacity of the tunnel there
will be no doubt of Hs e.c1.vamiage.
The qualities desired in a

sc~entific

balance may be sum-

merized as follows:

1. It should we:i.gh aJ.l fOJ:'ces and moments simuJ.taneouslY9

2. It shoulc1. allow an incic1.ence change th:rougll 360 0

•

3. It should allow the use of any type of spinrUe o:r w:i.re
support.
I
4. I"t should. allow a. yaN of r.

20°.

5. Forces and moments should be (;ontinuoul'31y :cecord.ed against
angle of incidence .
6. Models sho'\.:j,ld. be easy to install an.d adjust

~

7. Computations should be reduced. to a minimum.
6. The weighing mechanism shoulci. be simpJe a.nei posit . ve.
i
9. The bc;1.ance shoulci. be stiff enough to use a.t high speed.s.

10. The balance shouJ..d be

sj

mple and lnex.pensiye to constJ:'uct.

In orde:/? to choose the type of baJ..ance best suited for
sclentific wo:r:k, the characterlsttcs of the nost successiul
balances will be considered.
The N.P.L. type of balance (Fig. 1) allows a ready adjustment of the angle of incid.ence, and the lift clrag and
moment readings are com.reniently read.

Its greatest disad.-

vantages are the difficulty of supporting thin ended. wings,

- 3 -

or any model at high speed, and as moments and not forces
are read, spindle corrections are difficult to make.

It is

also impossible to simultaneously read all forces and moments.
The wire balance as used at Gottingen (Fig. 2) has the
advantage of being inexpensive and simple, but it does not
allow large angular

ch~nges,

and it is not universal.

The new Washington Navy Yard balance, w
orking on the
parallelogram principle, is the highest development in wind
tunnel balances at the present time, and although it is selfbalancing, it is not recording.
incidence is from

i 360

+ 90 0

The range of the angle of

to _90 0 with the usual set-up, and

by a special set-up.
After a careful study of the preceding types of balances

had been made, it

~as

decided that the most satisfactory ar-

rangement would be a rigid ring completely surrounding the tunnel or wind stream, so that the model could be supported from
it by W
.ires or any arrangement of spindles.
moments acting on

t~is

The forces and

ring can then be recorded by suitable

weighing apparatus.
A diagrammatic sketch for a balance of this type is shown
in Fig. 3 .

The weight of the balance is supported on a long

torsion wire, with a mercury or w
ater float to carry most of
the load, and the lift on the model is measured by a simple
lever.

The drag and pitching moment are measured by two arms

connected to ball bearings at the upper and lower side of the
ring.

The difference of the weighings give the moment and

- 4 -

their sum the drag.
and rolling moment
~ngles

In the same
a~e

v~y

the cross-Wind force

measured on two similar

to the air stream.

~rms

at right

The yawing moment is measured at

the bottom of the balance through a flexible jOint.

All

weighing arms have corresponding counter weight arms to keep
the systems in tension, and as the movement of the arms is
restricted to a very small amount l the problem of stability
does not arise .
t

The methods available for recording the forces on the
arms consist of the following:
1.

A motor driven sliding weight, in the manner of a test-

ing machine.

This method requires the mounting of the record-

ing drum on the balance arm, thus making it impossible to record the sum or difference of two weighings which, as will
be shown later , is quite essential.
2.

A spring or Toledo type of balance has been suggested

but the deflection required is much too large, as the arm

•

should not have a movement of more than a few thousandths of
an inch, or there will be interference between the different
weighings, and the stabIDlity would have a serious effect.
3.

The forces could be recorded by a mercury filled sylphon

as shown in Fig. 4.

The pressure is recorded by the height

of a mercury column, which covers a slit before a moving strip
of bromide paper .

Let us assume that the maximum pressure

to be read is one kilo, with an accuracy of 1 gram.

As the

height of the mercury could be recorded to 1/10 mm. the total
height would be 10 cm.

Assuming that the area of the mercury

5 -

column could be made as small as 4: sq.mm . , the a:.ea 0-:: the
~ould

sylphon
be .5mnl.

be 7.4 sq.cm. and its maximum deflection would

While this cieflection would not be objections.ble

on some arms, it would be very much too large in most cases.
This method is very simple and positive, ')ut there would be
considerable temperature corr3ction 'N hich would be objectionable for recording
4.

wo~k.

A more complicated fluid device is shown in Fig. 5

vvhich will keep the deflection dO.Vll to a -very small value.
The force on the arm is simr;ly bCilanced by the flu.id pressure
in a sylph on or diaphrc:.m.

The fluid is pumped through the

chamber and its escape is regulated by an electrically controlled valve, operateo, by contEl.cts on the balance arm, and
the pressure in the chamber is recorded in the same way as
before.

This device would require considerable developing

and Nould be
5.

r~ther

expensive to construct.

The simplest and most satisfactory device is probabJ.y

an adjustable chain weight as used in chemical balances, (Fig.6).
This is simple, accurate and allo rt's the recording pen to be
easily attached.

This method has been tested out and it is

found that machine-made commerCial chain is

o~fficiently

uniform to give good results.
In Fig. 7 is shown a method of using this chain i7eight
on a recording balance.

One end of the chain is attached

to the balance arm and the other to · a slide driven up or down
by a screw which is operated by a reversible electric motor.
This motor receives its current through the contact pOints

on the balance arn, so tba1. it will aU1.on;atically
force .

bala~ce

the

A pen is connected to the slider by a steel tape in

order 1.0 reduce

~he

m
otion, and this pen records the force

on a drum which is dr iven synchronously with the ffiodel.

It

is possible to use a heavy enough chain to take care of all
ordinary force s 1

b~t

i1hen runs are made at high speed, it

.'Vill be necessary to add unit weight s, and
GO

c:Lllo~1

the instrument

reb4a.nce.
As it is very deoirable to plot actual forces and mom-

ents, the fo r mer are obtained by mounting a pen on an equaliZing bar so that th e

SU:il

of the forceE,) are recorded (Fig. 8) ,

and the lat1.er by mounting the drum on one slider and the
pen on the other (F i g . 9) sO that the difference of the forces
are given.
In conclusion, the proposed type of oalance will support
the model rigidly i n a variety of ways, w
ill make a complete
test without attention, and Will plot the results so that
all computations are c:.voided.

While this balance is more ex-

pensive to construct than the usual type, it would certainly
pay for itself in a short time, by the large volume of work

it could turn out and by the re duction in the w
ind tunnel
pay roll.

