REPORT No. 34.
ALUMINUM AND ITS LIGHT ALLOYS.
By PAU% D.

MMUCA.

This is the subject of a recent cirmdar issued by the Bureau of Standards.’ It contains
information compiled from various sources, including the published Wraturs, manufacturers
of ahmdnum and its slloys, Bureau of Standards test reports and miscellaneous correepondenoe on the physical and mechanical properties of aluminum and ita light alloys, with chapters
included on the corrosion md deterioration of the metal and its alloys.
A summary is given of the resemh work which has been done here and abroad on the
constitution and mechanical properties of the various slloy s~tems with aluminum. The
mechanical properties and impositions of commercial light alloya f~r cssting, forging, or
rolling, obtainable in this country sre dawribed.
The circular is completed by a bibliography of sources of data and information. A table
of contents follows:
4. Aluminum:
I. Commercial
e.luminum—
L Sourcal, etauurgy.
m
2. commercial
grades, eei!.
U
3. Production,
pk
11. Metekgmphy.
HI. ~emicfd pmp@i&
L Corrmion—
(a) Protection aluminum
of
@net corrc9ion.
2. Alumiuotkmy.
m. PhyEicaI
propertieEL Electricalmagnetie
(a) Elechicelconductivity.
(b) Thermo-electromotive
force.
(c) FJechlyticecktionpotentiel.
2. ~L-e~ —
-prom@”
(a) Chauge f State.
o
(b) Thermal conductivity.
(c) Thermal
apanl?ivity.
(d) specific heat.
3. Optid
4. Mecbanical—
(a) Eketicity.
(b) Teneile
W
(c) Compree6ion
tek
(d) Hardneea.
(u) AIternatiug
Etreea
tem
5. MiecelIaueone(a) Dmeity.
V. phy&!d pmpti~ athi@er andtier tempemmm=.
VI. Technol~—
1.-.
2. working.
3. Welding
andsoldering.
4. Ektrolytic depmhion
eoua
opt?rationlL
5. Miecekn
VII. Theproperties aluminum sffectedby mechanid mrk andby heattredment.
of
u
ICircder No.761d the BIImMLof
St-d81dL
WI

1

ALUMINUM
AND ITS LIGHTALLOYS.

351

dOJ’t3.
B. Lights.Iuminum
VIII. Investigation alIoywrieEof
1. Alumimmwmpper.
I
2. Aluminum-iron.
3. Aluminllm-magnesium.
4. AIuminum-manganeM
andaluminum-mmganeee-coppEz
5. Muminum-nickel
andahnfnum-nicldcopper.
6. Alurnfnum+iliccm
7. A1um.inum+inc.
8. MisceUm
of
systems
(a) Sm&eistePsinvestigations binary
(b) Equilibria,
binmy,andternary.
Ix commer&?J
aUoys1. Caatingnddiecasting.
a
2. Rollingandfo~.
S. Duralumin.
4. Miemlbmeous
alloys.
X. Physical roper&a lightslloys.
p
of
aIkryE
XL Corroeion
auddieint.egrstion
of Iight
ofahllninulnuoyswithother
a
materi.dfconstruction.
o
XIII. Comparison
ofdeneity mechankl propertied
md
XHL “Heavy“ dmninum
alloyE.
XIV. Appendk—
1. De.Enition physical erme.”
of
t
2. SpecMcatione
foraluminum
anditsalloya.
9. Bibli~phy.

IR addition to the information wmtained in Grcular 76 of the Bureau of Standmds, attention may be oaUed to the series of reports issued by that Bureau duriug the year 1918, on the
general subjeot of ahuninum alIoy investigation. Some of the important c0nolusion9 of these
reports are:
L REPORTOF THE PIWIPARATION TESTSOF MAGNESIUM
AND
ALUMINUM
ALLOYS
This work consisted in the melting ud oasting of some 16 aIIoys at the bureau, tests of
some of these alloys as cast, the forging at tie navy yard m.d the rolling at the New Km4.ngton
plant of the United States Aluminum Co. of others, and the testing of these alloys as rolled and
as heat treated.
Although the work was not exkra.ded enough in oharaoter to admit of very far-reaching
oonolnsions, the following may be regarded as established:
1. For forging and rolling alloys the magnesium oontent may appawntly not go above 3
per oent since, without exoeption, it w= impossible to forge tlM 6 per cent magnesium alloy
and those captaining only 3 per oent of magnesium forged and rolled quite badly.
2. Magnesium aluminum alloys of magnesium omtent higher thm 3 per oent are of no
value for rolling or forging md *VS quedionabk value only for oasting, for the reason tit tiey
reaot most readily while hot wdh air, nitrogen, end water. The exaot limits of eanpositiort
ahuninum
cdng
alloys have yet to be determined, however.
for Magnesium
3. The tensile strength values obtsined upon these floys in no ease were superior to those
of standard duralumin.
IL

f-MAGNlWUMRRPORTOF THE PREPARATION
AND TESTS OF ROLLEDALLOYS—AL~
LMAGNESIUM-COPPRR,
ALUMINUM-MAGNESIUM-MANGANESE
NKnmL, ALmmNUn

The results of these tests on the three ternary aystams indioati the folIowing important
ecmolusions:
1. The alloys of aluminummagnesinm-manganese me not afkoted by heat treatment;
the IJoye of shunhmm-msgnesium-niokd OIJYvery @htly;
the alloys of aluminum-magnesiumoopper show a decided improvement in the physioal properties after heat treatment, smLounting
to as muoh as so per oent inorease in the tensile strength. @se Report lH.)
2. Even in the rolled or the rolled md =mald
oondition the mm.gsnese and niokeI ternary
series are inferior to the oopper series m fw as p@eiotJ properties are ommerned; wtmged

352

ANNUAL
REPORT NATIONAL
ADVISOEY OMMITTEEOEAERO?KAUTIOS.
C
F

according to strength, the copper series come first, then the manganese series, and finally the
niokel series.
3. h the ahminum-magnesium+mpper series it is advantageous to have the copper content
larger than the magnesium cuntant, preferably twice as great.
The general conchsion then from this investigational work is that from the standpoint
of physical properties, tende strength, ud hardness, the ehminum-magnesium-manganese
and ahminum-magnesium-nickel series are not to be considered, since they are quite inferior
to the ahminum-magneeium+opper series. lt should not, hovmver, be assumed from this
that for all purposes the former two series me not useful, since for some applications it is more
desirable to have an alloy which is resistant to ccmcosionor which retaimsits strength at higher
temperatures rather than to have merely a strong alloy. For such purposes these series may
prove to have a value more nearly equal to that of the copper serks.
III. REPORTOF INVESTIGATION THE HEATTREATMENT ALLOYSOF ALUMINUM
OF
OF
AND
MAGNESIUM
WITH COPPE&MANGANESE
AND NI_
RESPECI!IVELY.
It is known that the highest physical properties of ahuuinum alloys ccntainhg magnesium
and copper are not obtained without heat treatment either immediately previous to or subsequent to the fial forming operation. Wti has shown that the tensile strength of the iilloy
of magnesium and ahminum is increased by quenching the aUoy from approximately 600° C.
and aJlowimg to ~oe for several days, and has patented this heat treatment process. Curiously
it
enough the hardening effect in aluminum alloys is not obtained by quenohing slone; an ,alloy
immediately aft= quenching is not harder than origimdly, but increases in tensile strength and
hardmawwith time, such that after a period of several days an incmmseof from 10 to 30 per
.
cent in hardnm may be obtained.
Until the present investigation the status of the heat treatment of aluminum allow has
remained as Wihn left it, with no further attention to the effect which variation in heat-treating
conditions, quenching temperature, time and temperature of’( age&”
temperature of quen@
medium have upon the physical properties produced.
Of the many interesting facts which have been didosed by this investigation, the following
seem to be the most important from the practical standpoint:
The physical properties which are obtained from heat treatment, consisting of quenching
and ageing, are dependent upon the conditions under which this heat treatment is csmied out.
The general metiod described origirdly by Wilm and patantad .by him is not the tit
satisfactory method of heat treatment of aluminum-ma=gnesium-copper alloys. A much better
heat treatment cmsista in the quenching of the material from a temperature varying from
510° C. to 620° C. in a bath at a temperature of from 100° C. to 1500 C. and ageing preferably in
this bath at the same temperature for from 10 to 16 hours, or at ordinary temperature for three
or four days. By this treatment bettar physical properties me secured and with 10SS
10SSof
time during ageing. The tendency of such alloys to crack durihg quenching is slso k.ssened by
quenching to 100° C. instead of to 20° C.
IV. FURTHER
INVESTIGATION THE HEAT TREATMENT THE DUEALUMIN
OF
OF
TYPE OF
ALUMINUM

ALLOY.

The object of this work wss tQ establish further the laws of the effect of wwying heat treatment conditions-quenching
temperature, time and temperature of ageing, on the physical
propertiw of duralnmin, and h determine the best practical conditions for this heat treatment.
The results justify the folkming ccmcdusions:
(1) (l%ere is not in the case of the duralumin type of alloy, as there is in the case of steel, a
detite quenching temperature which marks the Iimit of the property of the mata%d to harden;
duralumin maybe hardened by quenching (followed by ageing} from temperatures varying from
250° C?.to 520° C?.,and the hardness obtained by quenm
from these temperatures increases
uniformly es the quenching temperature increases, reaching a maximum at the latter temperature.

—

ALUMJN

Uhf

AND

ITS

353

ALLOYS.

LrQE3?

(2) Duralumin, on the other hand, k similar to steel in the fact that the tempering of it
or aging aftar quenching is determined by two f&ctors: time and temperature. A temperature
of 150” C. markawhat may be called a critical temperature with respect to the ageing of duralumin; i. e., above that temperature continued ageing may cause a decrease in hmdness after the
maximum hardness is attained, whereas below that temperature no such subsequent decrease
of hardness occurs. The lowest temperature at which the maximum hmdnas may be obtained
s approximately 125° C.
(3) ‘lb rate of increase of hardness with time upon ageing is roughly proportional to the
temperature of ageing.
(4) The period of time of holding the specimen at the quench& temperature before
quenching has but an inappreciable eilect on the properties obtained; on the other hand, an
improvement in the hardness of specimens quenched from temperatures below from 500° C. to
520° C. is obtained by preheating them before quenching to the latter range of temperature.
Specimens held for 21 hours at the higher quenching temperatures before quenching (515° C?.
to 525° C?.)were blistered with consequent decrease in hardness.
(5) lieating the material above 520° C. is generdy detrimental; the material usually
blisters and an oside layer is formed on the surface.
(6) The following tende properties have been obtained on rolkl sheet of the above
composition:

I

t Eloo#ft&In

Tensile Wrmgth

I

‘@OdlM’
PGudrrp&$g.

f%

60;OOI

P*ww&#f.
m:(w)

k

‘

I

I

s

——

—.

.:. ...
..—.
,.—

Ptr C&
2)

(t’hme properties maybe obtained by quenching from 516° C. followed by ageing for one
week at from 125° C. h 150° C., dependi~c upon whether a high proportional liiit with low
ductility is dwired (agehg temperature of 150° C.) or the canverse.
1670S&S.Doe.807,-23
.

.. ..-

—

. ..
..

