l

t:- '"'
v..

0

fA\

'{
(

c

J.

5
C

TECHNICA L NOTES
HAl'rONAL ;WV I SORY cmi1i1TEE FOR AEROl-TAU'I r cs .

~

\J
~

No . 56

~

':'HE

DEVEIJOPHE!~T

OF

GER1EA~'J

IE!:-,

1fji l ~e:m

DOCU~7

"l \ f' -.

"NASA FILE COpy
Ho ff .

.'

Bate

loan eXllires on last
stan ll)F.,t on b~~k O'ter.

Plf~~~ RfT!.',·ZN TO
REPORT VIS np~ " :OrJ SECTION
LANGLEY RE':::iWCH CtN TER
'
NATIONAL I\fROI'~.r1U
MW
SPACE ADMINISUMTiON

TON '-OAN FR'W THE FILES Of

ncs

- FO" ,\SRONAUTICS
I

~~

ARIW ATRPLAIJES DUREJG THE ':fAR .

By

THIS

Z

1?

,

l "

Lt

Langley Field. Vi. lir!ia

.
--

,

•

.f. Fe.

~~.

EO

IL

~

To be re..url;ed to
e files of the National

I\E.RONAUnCS

Advisory Committee
ft:

'"

for Aeronautics
Bshington, D. C,

NATIONAL ADVISOHY COM1UTTEE FOR i\ER OIJ AUT ICS .
TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 56.
THE DEVELOP':1ENT OF GERHAN ARbiY AIRPLANZS DURING THE WAR . *
By

Engineer-Dr. Wilhel~ Hoif
German Expe rimental Station for Ael'ial NaVigation, E. V. ,

Adlers~of.

S U :J 1:J A. R Y

The author, ';vho Vi8.8 a captain of the Reserit8s in 'che Technical Department of the Aviation Division (Board of Airplane Experts)
dur ing the war, shows what means ~7ere taken for the creat ion of
ne v airl_lane types and ;'~hat tests ,,\iere employed f or trying out
i!
their flying prope rtie s, capacitie s and structuraJ. r c; liability .
The pl'incipsrl. repxesentative type s of e a ch of the classes of airplanes are de8crioed and the charcocteristics of the important
structural parts are discussed , Data :regarding the m.unber of airplanes at the front and the flying efficiency of the various
c1asse s of airplane s are given. (The matter is taken from a lecture
del iver e d on Apr j.l 17, 1918, at the meet ing of the "Wissenschaft·liche Gesellschaft f-{ir Luftf2~hrt ,II and supplemented at the terminat ion of the war.)
Introduct iO~1.
The fact that the peace ter ms oblige us to giv e up military
aviation entirely i8 a great compliment to Germa!l flyers and aircr aft . Germany has g ood reason to be proud of t he devel opment
of the vigorous technique which has been terminated thereby .
The airplane industry is, for the greater yart, under the neces·si ty of turning to other work.
In revie .....,ing the developn:ent of German military aircraft during t he war we nill only de scr ibe the main feature s and the pr inc ipal type s which 1'e suIted the 1'e £'r01;,]. The large st mil i tary aiI'planes, the R-airplanes, will not be dealt with nere as their dev elopment has already been described in the 1919 jovrnal, p.497
and foIl 0'Ni!1g.
The Aviation Division systematically left the construction
of airplanes to the airplane industl'Y. By maintaining this attitude tfiCl Board of Air~la:le Expe rt s whi oh procured the :::"il'plane s ,
*Special repl'int from the "Zeitschrift des -"ereines deut s cher Ingenieure ,II 1920, p.493.

- 2 -

e ngines, and all the innumerable parts for the equipment and attendance of the airplanes, stimulated the various airplane companies
to continuous competition and thus promoted progress.
In England,
on the contrary, the authorities at first designed the airplanes
a nd had the m built under t he ir own supervision at the factories .
For this reason the govermnent was violently attacked in Parliament:
the failure of the English airplanes to~mrds the end of 1915 and
beginning of 1916 being attributed to this fact (liThe Aer.cplane ll
December 27, 1916, and flFlight" December 28,1916, and January 4,
1917_) The disadvantages of the German w
ay, however, became apparent whe n the output had to be tremendously increased and the factor~es lacked trained men.
Thus the new types w
ere not designed by the Board of Airplane
Experts, but by one of the original Germ
an factories , of which
t here were about t w
enty. The se ne w de signs were as a rule made in
consequence of requests from the front. Those at the front however did not restrict themselves to stimulating the construction of
new types at home, but after the first encounters in the air,
brought ne;v types into existence themselves , by taking arrus and
bombs on their airplanes, for instance, and by i mpr oving t heir Bairplanes by installations, long before t he arrival of the O--airplane s .
The A--airplane s we re the old, unarmed double- seater monoplanes, the "Tauben," a name wh ich our adversaries at first gave
to all German airplanes. The only German observation airplane, at
-the beginning of the i~r, wa s the B-airplane, a two-seated biplane.
The C-airplane w the first to receive special equipment and afteras
wards three groups of them w
ere built: for short range reconnOitering, a 200/220 HP vertical engine w used j for d istant reconnoias
tering, a 260 HP vertical engine ~as usedj and the Cl-airp1ane,
that is, the lightened C-ai rplane, for convoying flights, in place
of the original C-airplane with 150/160 HP vertical engine . The Sairplanes (Schlachtflugzeug-battleplane) with 260 HP vertical engines were desi gned for attacking targets on the ground, but they
did not reach the front .
1

Aral_~d~·one~S 'Gat~r.:3~~e.re used as pursuit airplanes: The E-airplane s w
ere rLonoplo.nes which were wi. thdrawn from service in the
winter of 1916-1917 , but whi ch, t oiva-rds the end of the v~r, again
made their appearance with an improved construction. The D-airplanes
were biplanes, and the Dr-airplanes (Dreidecker) we re triplanes.
They ~ere usually equipped with t wo machine guns (U .G.), more rarely with three, and occasionally with wireless installation (F.T. Funken Telegraphie) and a small f uel supply.

J-airplanes (Jagdflugzeuge-Pursuing or Battleplanes) like the
C-airplanes were armored. Only very few N-airp1anes (boffibing airplanes JVith high carryi ng capacity for night flying) were built, as

- 3 -

they were crovvded out by the G-airplanes ;ihen the latter had to
make th~ir flights by day.
The airplane types mentioned so far had only one engine each,
the G-airplanes (Grossflugzeug - large airplane) on the other hand,
were all furnished with two. They had to carry bombs, and I most
of the time, three men.
This explanation is not exhaustive because in actual practice
the employment of the various types overlapped according to the
need of the moment.
The variety of tasks at the front was so great that at first
it v~s impossible to build a special class of airplane for each
purpose. For a long time our aviators had to be content with a

"general utility airplane": first the B-airplane, then the Cairplane, whereas a far-reaching adaptation to separate tasks
would have made greater progress in construction possible. The
problem confronting O\IT adversaries vas less difficult. The factories at their command were more extensive and their lines of
supply and also their battle-fronts were shorter. They ~ere
therefore not obliged to limit the number of airplanes destined
for special purposes, This start cleared the way for a similar development on our side in about the spring of 1915, because the
armored airplanes, the bombers, and light one-seaters had to be
outclassed,
Aviation construction was dependent upon the development of
the engines, w
hereas in ship construction it is customary to adapt the engines to the purpose of the vessel. The airplane engine which had been developed separately was the decisive factor.
The chOice of the engine was determined by the efficiency, weight,
reliability, size, number of revolutions, use of materials, and
other properties of the engine, forming the basis of its reputation, such as smooth running aEd simplicity of repair. The engine
industry placed at the disposal of airplane constructors about 15
types of vertical engines - the varieties within the types not
being counted - and about eight types of rotary engines. The
heavy but reliable and economical vertical engines out-number the
lighter more sensiti.ve and w3.steful rotary engines. Ea.ch type of
engine was used for a considerable number of airplane types. '
Table I shows the distribution of the airplane types and classes
to the engine types. In the columns of the table are inserted the
numbers of the airplane types which were built in series, (experiments being omitted). Tables 3 and 3 demonstrate better than words
the extent of the industry which grew up in order to supply the
needs of the troops.

- 4 ,..,

TA.oLE

c.

Yearly ai~lan~cons\ructjon}_~uped accordi~~_c1ass.
Con§ truct~on ye 2r
Class : 1911 :1912 :1 913 :1 14 :1~15 :1~16 :1917 :1918 : Total
- - - - -- -· . .22
A
13
168
294
568
11
60
13

B

7&

278 :1054 :1312

4.40 ....2393 :

25:

6191

:2674 : 4726 : 10337: 7320 : 25057

C

1 :2129

D

4945: 5132 : 12207

Dr

1:

339

:381 '". ).:

1028

338:

E

347

300

--

G

185

465

589 : 789

2028

450 : 463

913

I

94:

S

:'1

Total

24 :136

10

204 :

2

100

N

2'

446 :1348 : 4532 :8182 :19746:14123: 48537

TABLE 3 .
Yearly construction of airplane

,

'T'
...

i

Stationary
engines

rn.... e ..

~pgines.

Rotary
engines

Total

1914

748

100

848

January to December 1915

4544

493

5037

January to December 1916

6930

8° C\
v 1"'

7822

January to December 1917

10364

836

11200

J anuary to December 1918

13757

1785

15542

36343

4106

40449

August to December

Total

* These airplanes of type Fok EV i'\"ere later renariled Fok D VIII although they w
ere monoplane s.

- 5 -

It is to be noted that theBe engines correspond to a cepacity of about 6, 000 ,000 HP, wherea("' the Zsc horne witz. (Golpa) high
p ower works have only a capa city of a bout 22G,OOO HP, and ~hereas
the 5000 locomot ives delivered during the vmr had a total capacity
about equal to the capacity of the total number of ail"plane engine s,
the importance of aviation during the war, becomes apparent.
The Testing of New Airplanes.
After the engine had been sele cted) the specif icat ions could
be determined in de t a. il , tile requir8iilents in this connection undergoing many changes. The gene ral utility airplane, provided with
four hours f u.e l, had to carry t ·,vo lr.en a nd a load of 40 kg . , a
useful load therefore of 365 kg. The climbing capacity requ ired
was 800 m. in 1 5 r;lin . After it was real iz ed that t he al t,~. tude
nece ssary f or w purpo ses wa s a.bove 80 0 m. , t~e r equ irements quic kar
ly ro se to 1 km. in 10 min. , 2 km , in 30 min. , a nd the proof that
3 km . cou ld be attained.
For starting and landing 100 :n o and 70 m.
runs we re pre scr ibed.
I

ith t he l a ter groups of types , the endurance , u se ful load ,
W
and 01 imb were each changed.
St.ati onary warfare made short flight s
possible and this diminished the amount of fuel necessary, The
C-airp lanes later r e linquished the carrying of bombs; this resulted in airplanes with a good climbing capacity, and at the lower
altitudes, especially good carrying power. The authorities at the
front, mistak ing t he technical mission of the a irp lane, exploited
this advantage by loa ding it to a n unsuitable extent.
In one case,
for instance, a report from the front gave out that the flying
capo.city of one of these airplanes, built with a viel7 to climbing
qualities, wa s still effiCient w
hen loaded with 50 kg. of bombs.
Unfortunately, the reduction of th e structural reliability was not
al '/o;'aYs considered on the occasion of such unreasonable overloading.
The airplane f a ctories were oblige d to obse rve the regulations
prescribed by the Board of Airplane Experts r egarding construction
and delivery. These were changed several times, so that experience
might be gathered, and for tDis re ason also, the regulations became more and more e laborat e , The Board of Airplane Experts not
only influenced t he air pl ane industry by laying do v regulations~
m
but urged by Major W
agenf {ihr, - t he commander of the Board of Airplane Experts - th e air plane industry, the experimental stations,
the e xperts and the military and naval bure aus decided to publish
their scientific and technical w
ork in a secret jo~rnal, 8alled
"Technical Reports of the Board of Airplane Experts. "* This journal was to be publi shed as needed and to be acce ssib le to tbe ex* Now to be had at Carl Schm idt & Co. , Berlin W , ',vho are al so go.
ing to publish a "Handbook on A
viationll (Handbuc h der Flugz3ugkunde )~ the scientific legacy of the Board of Airplane Experts.
This work will comprise the results of all of the scientific work
within the scope of the Board.

- 6 -

perts.
In this way three volume s, rich j.n material, were produced
in 1-1/2 years.
Berore building a whole series of a type, a few trial airplane s w
ere usually built} and the se were te sted with regard to
flying properties, such as efficiency, structural reliability, capacity ror resistance during operation, and ad2.ptability witb respect to reproduction. Unfortunately the tests were so extensive
that not all of th em were possible of execut ion. The flying. properties, nam
ely, the maneuverability and control of the plane at
various altitudes and in various positions, ~s judged almost entirely by specially experienced pilots. The control surfaces were
de signed almost solely en the basis of exper ience gat hered in earlier construction and were subsequently tested during flight. A
method of calculating their reliability was discovered only during
the last few months, so that judgment with regard to the flying
properties depended, therefore, very largely upon personal opinion,
and the many failures show that, up to the end, there \~S no agreement as to the properties which should be developed,
It was not
until later, that the Board of Airplane Experts w
orked at the development of a stabil~ty theory and its application in practical
airplane construction. For longitudinal st ability at least, a
technically serviceable method was thereby found.
For the flying properties (climbing power and speed) a better
evaluation was possible. Extensive ca lculations have cleared up
the relations of climbing speed, engine output, propellerefficiency, viscosity of the air, weight of the airplane, propert'ies
of the wings, so that it was no longer necessary to form an estimate of the climb capacity based merely on previous experience.
There remains the peace-time task of ascertaining each one of these
values separately, which as yet i s not quite possible in all cases.
According to the specific a tions first laid down for a ccepting
an airplane, it had only to attain a prescribed altitude within a
certain time. No investigat i ons were made as to whether it could
attain a considerably higher altitude or wh~ther its ceiling had
already been reached. As it is possible to draw any number of
circles touching two points, but only one touching three points,
as many ascending curves as desired may pass through two points
upon a strip of barograph paper, but only one ascending curve
through three points (Fig. 1). Later, therefore, not only the per. iod of the 'a ace-nt to a certain altitude was speQified, but 2.lso
the periods for several intermediate points, for instance from 3
to 4 km. and 4 to 5 km. From the autumn of 1916, as many airplanes
as possible were required to be able to attain an altitude of over
5 km. , and we re, if po ss ible , to retain good flying properties at
that altitude . Th ere f ore, with th e ideal climb curve of the new
airplane, t he a ltitude limit Which the airplane approacheG aaymtotically (assuming that the we i ght remains the same) was 6.5 km.

-

7

~.

The climb curves received abbrev i ated de s i gnations. The class of
airplane s built for climbing pur p ose ~ , the climbing cla~s of. 5 .. 0/
45, attained 5 km. in 45 min. (cla s s altitude) ~ a nd thelr cellln~
was incr e ased 1. 5 km. , reach ing 6.5 km. The alrplane s of the cllmb ~_
ill.g class of 15/20 att aine d 1. 5 krf.• i n 20 min. with a ceiling of
5 km. F ig. 2 shows a combination of ascending curves for various
classes with a basic ascension period of 60 min. to the class altitude.
If the airplane becomes lighter as the fuel is consumed the
altitude limit is, of course, increase d. Th is increase was, however, only taken into account in individual cases w n calculathe
ing the climbing capacity. Generally speak ing, the full 7leight of
the airplane on leaving the ground was decisive.
Whe n measuring the climb, the s e ason of the year e xe r c ises a
strong influence on the results and was take n into account, for
awhile, as foll O iVS: The average air strata, as calculated according to meteorological tables for each 1/3 of a month, was assumed.
This i>yaS, howeve.r, not sufficient as the daily condition of the
weather deviated too much from these averages. On the other hand,
yvith the great numb e r of airplanes that had to be acce pted, practical considerat ions prevented tak ing the da. ily variat ions of the
Weather into account.
In the end, w
hen testing a type, it was
considered sufficient to measure the periods of ascension very accurately with the aid of air pre ssure and t emperature recorders,
and use the ascension time s in t he acceptance t ests only for the
purpose of a general compari s on.
Speed w not measure d re gu18,rly. To accompl ish the latter
as
steady , horizontal fli ghts a re a re quisite, and e ven trained pilots cannot always accomplish this accu rately. At lo w altitudes,
er
where it is easier to hold the airplane at a certain level by r e ason of the direct comparison "vv ith the ground, th e number of revolutions of the eng i ne is too high a.nd the pilot is obliged either
to throttl e the e ngine or to use the elevat ors, e ither of w
hich
spoils the results of the experiment. Altimeters w
hich facilitate
adherence to a certain altitude w
ere not built to use for speed
measur~ments only.
In the future they will gain in i mport a nce for
surveYln~ by taking p'hotographs from an airp lane.
For measuring
~pee~, e~ther static measuring appara tus or wind gauges w
ere used;.
ln tne alrplane. The indications of the former w
ere, ho w
ever, de~
pende nt on the altitude of the airplane a nd the i ndications of the
latter. were based on the rotation of an air propeller or cup-vane.
Both klnds are dependent up on ·che ir p osition in the airplane.
In
conseq':lence of the uncertainty of the spe e d measurement s, the most
confuslng reports w
ere in circulation about spe e ds that had be en
attained or li;e re attainable .
-

- 8 -

The Board of Airplane Experts, it is t rue, specified minimum
speeds, but was obliged to l'elinquish systa matic varification of
the tests, as they lacked suitable measuring processes to govern
the acceptance of the airplanes. The speed was judged merely by
comparison with the speed of othe:::- airplanes "that had been tried
out at the front.
At the same t iDle the new airplane wa.s observed
with regard to its climbing propertie s, horizontal flight and
glide as compared with the airplane alreo..dy thoroughly tested.
Experiments regard ing speed measurements wit h the aid of t~eodo­
lites were made at Do~eritz in 1916, l a ter again at Adlersnof and
finally near Lake Muritz in Mecklenburg. It is appare nt from the
results that, generally speaking, the estimate of the speed of the
airplanes was too high.
The followin g speeds are probably about correct:
TABLE 4.
Speeds attained by airplanes.
H 0

Class

r i z

0

w
ithout

n tal

S P e d
with

Remarks

altitude eng ine s
krf.(hr .

Battleplane

km ; hr .

135 t o 140

165 to 170

C-airplane (st rong
(we ak
C1-airplo.ne

135 to 140
125 to 130

160 t'o 165
140 to 145
160 to 165

G-airplane

115 to 120

135 to 140

)

). alt itude
)
)
)

about
4 km.

With the outl in ing of the ef ficiency and pe r f ormance specificat ions, .the acceptance test s f or an ai.rp:J,.ane t ype were exhausted. Be f ore c.ommissioning a type , test;3 '.Ive re al vvc..y s made for the
reliability of. the structural parts,. The pr.a ctice, iTIlhi ch had been
instit~ted in the AViation Division sinc e the accidents of th e
a.utumn of 19 13, of t~ sting the wi~1gs by loading t ne m wit h. sand i n
which. the effects of the a ir forces i~3 i mi tated by fil ing up the
sand .un.eq'llally , -vvas elaborated and ext ended. In accordance -Nith
t he greater stre ngth reqp i red for battleplanes J sev e ra~ v e ry import~nt fly ing attitude s were tested under sev e r a l 'cond itions in

t h e ende av Qr to be certain .t h at t h e aiI' pla-r1e i,:>vld be st rong enough
wh e n .pu.l l ing ou t of a qive, wnen .c;l.i v ing, gl iqi ng, o r winen f l y i ng
u.p :::,j,O-e dOi7l;1. . The test s } f u :cthe.r mor e , c ove :.t:eci a l l the import a nt
s t r uctu ral pa r t s ,. such as . wing s~ s t ab il izing p lanes, st eer i,n ~ gear ,
fus elag e] aI}q ..l a nding ge a.r.
Calcu J,.ation s of expe,rimen.ts wi,t h models } meaSUrer!le n t .s r(~ad$ during f l ight and. cal clllat i on s 'oa.sed OYi
a c tual exper i enc e i T: a e r ial n av i g4t ion ( supplementa r y work in t ~ i s
c onn e ct io~ b~ ing CO ~Bt antly in p r og re ss) s e r ve d a s a b ~~~s fo r
t hes e t e.s ts . By t h e e.n d of 19 1 8 ,. t h e t e st ing s.t ation i3.t Acllershof
had worked OIl. about 200 a i r p lane s and complei;.e d ab ov.t 2Q.oO separ a t e te s .t s .
J

As t h ese qtr e ngt h te sts. We r e very costly ., a means Was ...sought .
t o r e duce t he expe nse . . Fr om t he b eg i ll~i ng of 1916, th~ r e :t: 0 1.'e,
ma-'.:h :3mat ica l s tr engt :'1 a nal y ses Nere r equir e d f rom t he airplane
c onstru ct ors as a ba s i s f o r the t e s t a of th e new airp l ane types .
A 3 t h i s Was n ot suf f icient W hout dafin it e spe c ifi c a ti ons , the
it
a
Boal'd of Airplane Ex pert s w s itse lf obli ged t o ';vork rut t he lines
alon~ whi ch t he s t a ti c ca lcu l ations '~l8r e t o .... e :·nalLe .
The vvork
of Mul l e r - Bre slau ) Re i ssne r , Ba uma nn a nd L::a.nr: V;ia s u se d in t11is
c onne ction .
In fur t he r anc e of t h i s wo r k , MUller-Breslau p~b l ish ­
e d i n the tlTechn i cal Rep ort s " (Techni s che Be ri ch·te ) an a cc ou.nt o f
a d.etai:~ e d inv estigat i on condu ct e d fo r the plJ.rpose of C5.1Ctllati ng
the s t re ngt h of a i rp l ane wi n g b eams , Unfortunat e ly the st rengti1
cal c'cla ti o:ls for c;, irplane s a re so c omplicat ed. that the r esults
( rvhic:1 i n adr:ition are oft e n op ::: n to que sti on on a ccount of the
unc e rt 8,in propert y o f ra ;; mat e rial.) } d o not r e pay the work .
F01' the pre se lt
it wi l l the 1'e fore b e n e oe ssary t o depend on
a ot ual t ests in o::. cie r to obt a.in a r e lia,b l e est hDat e of t he s trength
of an e xpe r i ment al c on 3truct ion .
I t i s fu~tt e r~o re not yet possible to ex c lude t h e s e t e s t s be oau se t he Toe t a l ~ i "Gt i ng s d n d ot he:::i rnp ort a:lt st.tucl:;u .r:b.l "l')a.l··L s (;o,nno"t; bs t e s t e d OT' t',F; 8tT (~ n gt h t e s'ji ng ma chine to an exte nt c 'Jrre spo:J.d i ng to a ct u al use .
I n a dc t i o!l
H
t o these te s t s tbg "i,'e ight stat i sti c s w:::-~icD th e Boe,ro. 0:: Ai r :iJ1an;J
E:..:pe r t s steadily deman ded , a n d wh i ch were v e r ifie d a,n d su-,ple mer:.t ed during t he tes t i ng of the a irp lanes fer st rer~gt~ ) vre :;:-e 0f
g r e c,t va l u e in form i ng an estimat e of th e ;'!lanne r of cO:i'. 1strLlctioD.

A nu mb e I' of t h e bre a k a ge. s in the Gt ru. c tural pc:,::::t s du ri ng cp e r a ti on we r e the !'e sult of vibra t ions '~vnlO:l we r e ceuuse d pa rtly
b y r e Benance Vii t n. the !'evol~~t ::'ons of t:::'e e ~gine a n G. pa~,-" t 11 by t{;' 8
rhyt hmi o e ddy e f :fc ct alOEs t h e sides of th e ':7ing s . Th e means io!'
avo idi!lg t hese iTib-rat ions is Y~nO i:v::1 .
The Boare::. of f.j.rpla ne E:(pe l't s, i n conj"'. :. n cti on W
it;" t he . z: od~l
t a.~ .c..s't aO .L!.. s 1--. :fle"!1t a 'c r..! + . '
1
~ .
. ,-TO J''::lnge,l , C 0::1:.:1 : J.1...I.0 0'. .L V •'n~ '~_r 8 1 ,-He.: 8 .
~. '.
"
J
.
..
I.·
c~
_ .,,~ ,.,...
Experlmen
t i g at i on s in th e 8xte n si -,,-e fie l d 0: ae::- oci:-I j e..Yi: i c s ;l i,l t h ou.gh industry h ad shown a liv e l y i nt eI."G3t i n the '.7or k a t Go t ting e:J. and .Adl e r s 1':'1

•

•

- 10 hof, the results of the measuring of ti1.e models were not adopted
to tna extent th ey de Se rved) be c ause th e Board of Ai rplane Experts requi red no proof of the aer ody na~ ic prope rt ies of the airplanes) a nd be cause th e de mand f or new ai r planes alwa ys exce eded
the supply.
It is true that most of the ex pe rimeLtal depart ments
of the airplane f E'v ctorie s VJe re prov ided vii ti1 amp~:_e means but the se
were s el dom used for the systematic investi gation of the cause or
effect 9f some phenomenon, but were, for th e most part, exha usted
in th e simple empiriC se arch for the best execution p o ssible.
Spec ial measuring apparatus fo r experir;ie ntal fli ght s wa s t!1erefore almost entirely lacking . Thus the Gt)t-t;inge n Model Expe rimental Establishment has not yet succeeded in having its wing rib
measurements verified during flight. M
uch remains the refore to
be done in connection with the investigation .of the airplane in
flight.
Since o~ ly the technically perfect airplane can be successful, the airplane industry wil l be ' obli ge d to make up this
work. The authorities who pass on the admission of airplanes for
aerial traffic, but who do not, like the Board of Airp lane Experts, take them over for their own purposes, will in the future
be obliged to require proof of the fl ying ability of the airplane s
and calculations for the flying properties as vvell as strength;

..

TA BLE

5.

-;~ ----------------------------------------~~======="=~-------

.

W

. R..... r.--;
.=1 Q"" 'le'•

UJ

:

OU

Us e f u 1

n'
~

t fi t : @

Loa d .

.
Fuel
:Wlreless and:
Bo m
bing
:photographic:Suf-:
:Un- :
outfits
:fic-:With :used:To:ie nt: a :loa d:ta l
: f or :load
:De:De: of
.
:scrip :scrip-:
.
.
k g . : t ion
k g . : tion
k g .: k g . :
kg.
h~. : kg .

~
'ti. :Occupant :ATJ:!lame r.t an d
o :Rotary: .r-!
f-!:
: Amr,lULi. ci on
(l)
: S tac:r:
s::
.
cU

:

tl onary

'=H
0

M

~

:De-

.r-!

<t:

A

.

o
: f'8:r ip ..,.... : No .: kg : ·l·i on
f-,

h.p.

100

1:

St.

2: ISO:

none

-::--~---

.
none

none:

4.

l45 ;40

100/
B

2:

120:
St.

150/
160
St.
C

200/
2.20
St.
260

2:

2: 130:

none

none

n one :

4

145 :40

How employed
up to the
termination
o f' the ·vvar.

: Fo r me rly r e con: naissance ;la t365: t crly "vi th:drawn f rom the
: se rvic e .
~
: For m ly re con- i
er
: nai ssance ; lat:te rl ye qu ippe d
-z6 r::: ·w t h do ub l e
i
~ ): stee ri ng appa : r a t us fo r
:trai ning school
:at home .
:Use d a t home
492:for training .
:Short range

516: rec onn a issance
:at tile f ron t.

~.

St.
~ -::-:--=::....=:-'"

..

:Long distance
5S0:reconnaissance
:at the f ront.

TABLE 5 (Cont'd)
Us e f u 1

:Engine ..
:Outfi t. :

:Armamen t and
:Occupant: Ammunition
r.:

:Wireless and .- Fuel
:How employed
:photographic
: Un:up to the
outfits.
:Suf-:With :used: To-: t e rmination
:fic-: a
:load : tal:of the war.
: i e nt: load

(l)

rf)

t'1

tU : Rotary.:

r-I

o

:Stationa r y.
@

Q)

cU
r-I

Bombir:.g

P.

H

'rl

<t:

r-I

.
~

:fo1' : of

<H

~

Loa d.

o

~

~

h .p .
Cl:

160/ :
~+SO~

:De:De: s cr ip: sc:rip: No.: kg.: ti on
kg. : tion
:1 fixed:
:

2:

D

Rot. :

2:

1:

:

with
r

:70

::. r_~mu-

...
•

•

oJ

.

St.

3: .

go:

: Train i ng
220 :p1anes at
: home.

70

2·

.

:1-1/~: 63

none

none

:1-1/~:51

.

.

:2

: 65

233: Wi thdravn: from
:the serv~ce .
:16.4 : 195:
: Pursuit plane s
235: : .
at

' .

:1-lJ?:43.3: 9.1: 180;the front.
.
..

:rrr-b:

:1-1.2 41

80: i ni ti on. :47. 6 :

130

Rot . :

M. G.

100:

st.

110

: munition:
:lIlxed :
1 00 : ll . G. \vi th : 50
:ammuni :tion.
100 '
0
2
80: fixed :47.6:

:7

160

Dr·

none

: \vi th am-:

'- - '"
0 "'-1
"" VI
120:
St.

16c _. :

M. G. : :

2: 165: 1 movablE? 61. 5:

.... " .

:De: scripkg . : tion
kg .: hr.: kg.
k g . :_ k g . :_~_~ _____ ~
:Provided:
: Con voying
< with:
:
::
:airplanes at
--- :wire-less: 21 :~ .$' . :109 .5: 3
360:the front.
: ou t fi t . :

:~:

180:

f--'
t\)

TA ~1E 5 (Cont'd)

Use f u 1

CD

:Engine
: Ou ti i t :

CD

:

cU

.rl

o

:Rotary : :.~

~

:Armame nt and
Ammunition
. p. :Occupant:

rl

.,

Q)

;

cU

Bombing

~

@ : S ta tion- ~'I
rl
a r y '. 0
p.
H

.

'M
~

0

: Z

h.p.
:30/120
Rot.
E

;160 Rot;

: 2 - 150:
St.
: 2 -8 220·.
.
St.
G .

;De:

:Wire1ess and
Fuel
:photographic : Suf-: wIth: Un:fic-: a :used:To:ient:1oad:10ad:ta1
:for : of

2:

: 2 mova2:180 :b1e M.G.:
. with
1 0 0:
: 270 :ammuniVarition
ous
ar; 4 mova-range-:
3:
:b1e M. G.:
ments
with
;24 5
1 30 :
:ammunition

.
: Ho'lV employed
:up to the
: termination
:of the war.

:De-

.
: scrl.pk g . ;tion

~:::

k f( .: hr.: kg.: ~_k :l..:..-",-._ _ _._ _ _.
-!f[,

2

1: 1:

.

:2 - 260:
St.

:De-

.
.
scrrp: scrlp:No . : kg . :tion
kg .:tion
: 1 fixed :
:M. G. "vi th: hO
:antrmni J
: tion
none
90
:2 fix e d
: M.G.with: 70
:ammuni:tion

:

Loa d.

: Formerly pur210: sui t a ir:p1anes ; 1at: t e r1y wi th:drawn from
: the service
I
and only r ep- ~
2 2 3:
:r esen t e d at
vI
: the f ron t by
: one ty-pe.

70

none
:1-1/2: 63

.
4
200:

none

>4 '3 5;

~ 3-2/3: 440 ~

.
30 0 :

.

.

.

.

: 'l'nose' ~ttill.
93S:in e xi s tence
:
: are training
:1010:a.irp1ane s at
: the front.

.

.

:

:pla n es .

;26.5';3-1/2: 508;25.5;1235:Bombi n g air:

:

:

:

'tABLE 5 (Cont 1 d. )
U
:Engine

;2 :Outf i t

Q)

cU

rl

o

H

p..

:Rotary

l=1
(1j
rl:

~

e f u 1

:

'Armament and
.
Occupan t; Ammuni tior~
'

•

:Wire1ess ana: Fuel
:Un- :
:photogra phic :Suf-:With:used:Tc:fic-: a :load: tal:
:i ent :load:
::or : of

.

·rl

Bomb j.ng

~

St a t'
10n ·- tt-i
0
ary.

:De :De~
~
: scri.fJ- : ;
: scriph.p.
:No.: kg.:tion
:tion
:2 mova- :
:b1e M.G.:
J. : 200 St.' 2
2 :165
wit~
:76.5: none
.
:ammunl-"
.
: ti on
J

Loa d.

l=1 .
m •

rl
Q)

8

•

:De : s crip- .
:
: .
:
kg . :tion
kg. : hr.: kg .: Kg.: kg.;
:Provided :
: ' . with
:wireless: 21
135 :12.5: 410;Infantry
3
: a nd pho-:
plane s .
:togr aphie
~l~fit:

2

N : 260 St . ; 01'

3

:1 m
ova- :
:1;)le M.G.:
2 : 170

\l7it~

:ammunition

How employed
up to the
t ermination
of the Ivar.

:Various:
aT500
35
range-:
ments :

.
non e

4

290: 5

-

, i:)

_

._ w

After these tests the airplanes were sent to the front and
the judgement passed upon them was aw.aited and utilized. The
quick grovnh of the Aviation Division, it is true, increased the
difficulty of this work because the number of aviators capable of
good te chnica1 judgment was proport ionate 1y smalle r.
It Vias imp ossible to organize, within the Aviation Division, specialized
Avia tor Sections commissioned with the task of trying the airplane types because the replacements for these specialized sections would have been difficult to find.
It is t~~ e that to ~a rds the end of 1914 and 1915 there was
such a section - the v1e1l knov'vn "Brieftauben-Abteilung Ostende tl
(Carrier Pigeon Section). Its technical reports were especially
esteemed for thej.r clarity, Faults in airplanes delivered were
altered as soon as possible in the later series. One of the essentials in this connection was to avoid delay in re~lacements.
The knowledge gained by comparisons with enemy airplanes : v~s
of great value as this afforded a means of finding out how to
outstrip the adversal~) so t he numerous captured airplanes we re
useful for this purpose. Thus the Nieuport -?-irplane of 1916
sho~ed flying properties that were technically advantageous and
Vlhich VJere imitated in many types. The difference of the armament, bombs, wireless apparatus and other parts of the equipment,
but especially th e engines, made it impossible to take over
tried out types of enemy airplanes.
In orde r to imitate the style
of construction of the model ty pe s of enemy aircraft we w
ould
have had to make radical changes in our workshops. A faithful
reproduction of the enemy airplanes was furthermore impossible
on account of the raw material situation in Germany, and finally~
it would have violated the consciences of the greater number of
our engineers to take over the styles of construction of the enemy wh ich on the basis of their experie nce they considered unreliable.
In spite of this we learned much from ou }.' enemies, who
evidently had good factories and investigating plants at their
command. But we w
ere not their pupils, and we did not copy their
celebrated large Handley Page airplane in the construction of
our large aircraft because the G-airplanes of the ' Gothaer ~~ggon­
fabrik were ready for flights to England as early as the vnnter
of 1916-1917, at which time the new Handley Page airplane landed
behind our lines by mistake and v~ s captured.
With the great number of t ype s which came into existence
during the course of the war, much wo rk vvas caused by the obtaining of new airplanes and t he many spare parts, that it became
necessary in 1917 to standardize the parts as much as W&s possible without pre judice to the types. Sta:ldard patterns we re
worked out by the War Ass ociation of the airplane industry a nd
v
rere t hen included in the requ irements g iven out by the Boa rd of
Airplane Experts. Th is con stitut ed t he beginning of a standard-

- 16 ization of aircraft in general Mlich was bound to come to pass
in the course of time.
CLASSES.
Table 5 comprises all the classes of airplanes and indicates
the distinguishing features of their special purposes. Since the
use to which airplane s at the front vrere put> varied considerably,
this compilation represents a cross-section of uses at one time.
Fig. 3 shows at What times and in ~mat numbers the different airplanes occurred at the front and how the newer types displaced the older ones. The A-airplanes disappeared first. Afew
were still used here and there behind the front lines in the second year of the vnr On account of individual preferences. The
number of B-airplanes increased quickly and uas great e st toward
the end of the first year of war and at the beginning of the
second. Until the introduction of the Cl-airplanes in the winter
of 1917-1918 the C-airplanes show no decrease in numbers and then
only a slight decrease, which is to be ascribed to the diminished aeronautic activity and the preparations for the spring of
1918, but in the third year of the ~arJ the B-airplanes quickly
disappeared. With the end of the first year of the war, the fir~t
pursuit airplanes - the E-airplanes - made their appearance at
the front. Their numbers increased until the spring of 1916,
and vrere then replaced by the D-airplanes. ·The number of the latter and also the Dr-airplanes was constantly increased from the
beginning of the fourth year as aerial warfare continued to gain.
in importance. The first G-airplanes w
ere sent to the front in
the summer of 1915. It was not until the third and fourth years
of the war that the latter increased in nwnbers, together with the .
growing frequency of the bombing attacks behind the lines and es·pecially in England. The armored battleplane - t~e J-airplane,
was first tried out and proven successful in the autumn of 1917.
Fig. 3 shows plainly ·the great numbers of airplanes sent to the
front just before the armistice, after a painful interruption of
the aircraft supply had occurred in June, 1918.
The A and B-airplanes had both been used for the same purposes and were unarmed. The Rumpf-biplane of the . LuftverkehrsGesellschaft Lvg Bl, (Fig. 4) was used as a model. In the B-.
airplanes the observer had the seat most advantageous for him, directly behind the engine and in front of the pilot. He could also lean out and take photographs. The pilot ~as able to overlook the rear of his airplane, a much vaunted advantage l,Vhich facilitates steering.
The 150/160 h.p. C-airplane j~S a development of the armed
B-airplane. The observer sits behind, since if in front, the
field of fire of the machine gun would be obstructed by the pro-

peller and the wings, ",f nereas at the back it is obstructed only
by the fuselage and tail surf~ ces. ~ ith very few exceptions all
the Co-airplanes have this se a t ing arrangerr.ent .; the AEG Cl (Fig. 5),
of the AEG Airplane Construction Division, Hennigsdorf, ma.y serve
as an example. Fu s elage and wing bea.ms consisted of steel tubing
as in other con struction of this plant . Its wings could be folded back v
men passing through the streets (Fig. 6) a feature v
mich
was abandone d by us as superfluous, but ~hich was used again later
in the Handley Page airplane in order to facilitate putting this
large airplane under cover. The accessibility of the engine (Fig.
7), beneath the hinged cup-like co w may even at the present time
l,
be used as a model, but in this construct ion, care must b e taken
to have a fastening that is reliable during flight.
The increasing demands resulted in providing the C-airplanes
also with the machine gun which shoots through the p ropeller and
w
hich had proven satisfactory on the E~airplanes.
Efforts were nO ~"i concentrated on jJroviding a cl ear fi e ld of
vision for both occupants. A good solution of t h i s ~ roblem is
sno';vn in the Rol C II .airplane, known as the fl l'Tna le fl (rJalfisch)
of the .' L.uftfahrz eug Gesellschaft· (Fig. 8), rmich sho "1S the first
,
well executed streamline fuselage.
In forme r eXjJeriments along
this line, the t a il surfaces had not b een designe d with suff icient effectivene ss for a rounded fuselage with the result that it
was thought that rounded fuselages resulted in difficult control,
The sk in of the fuselage \~S constructed of laminated wood on
.
templates v;ith the strips cross wise, a process v.hich later took
its place bes ide the process of laminated wooden pa nels introduced by Albatros a fe w years prev iously and w
hich be came com.rnon
property.
J

Of the C-airplane varieties the AGO . Cl of the AGO Airplane
factory may be rr.entioned, in vmic~ the e ngine was behind the oc cupants, arid, in ~lace of the customary single fuselage, there
w re t "vVO lateral fuselage s. The Automobile and Aviat ik A. Co .
e
furnished their C-a i rplane with sliding rails f or the machine gun
on both sides of th e fuselage, so that the observer might be able
to remain in front . .
I n the summer of 1916 the 200/ 220 h.p. C-airp lanes \llie re
brought out. The DFW C V of the Deutsche Flug z eug ~rerke VIas very
popular and it \'V8,s possible to have it reproduced at other factories.
The 220 h. :P. D IV e ng ine of the Dai!:fJler Motor Oompany , was
the only stat ionary e ng ine r:i t h a n incre a s e d effici e ncy due to a
spur gear syst em for di mini s11 i n~ the r~umoe r of revolut ions of the
prope ller. The Alb C V (Fig. 9) of the Albatros Works which was
furnished with this device displaye d r e markable e fficiency. The

- 18 -

smoothness of the D IV engine s ~as, however, not satisfactory
but all effort s to produce another kind of stationary engine with
transmissi on gearing that was service abl e for the front were unsuccessful. In spite of the fact t hat engine s w:i. th transmission
gearing to propellers of large diameter po s s e s s t he disad.vantages
of additional engine w
eight and frequently high-l egged undercarriages, they are, by reason of their greater efficiency, superior to the high speed propeller.
A glance at the pilot cockpit of a mor e rec ent C-airplane,
LVG C V (Fig. 10), shows the control st ick in the middle with the
trigger for the ' fixed mach i ne gun on t he upper ri ght; to the left
are the switches for operating the engines.; below, on the left,
is the wirele s s dynamo with V belt dI'ive~ and to the right, the
compass. The box in the front contains th e cartridge belt, w
hile
the revolution counter is fastened to the s t ee i tube vm ich supports the machine gun.
With the C-airplanes, the ade quate provisi on for the e quipment ( - hich \vas ho w e r just 2 S important as the f ly ing properN
ev
ties and the efficiency of the airplane) w
as, at the tim of dee
signing, often neglected in favor of t he smo othness of the fuselage. This frequently delayed the commissioning of the airplanes
for weeks.
y

Of the air plane s constructed w
ith 260 h_ p . engine s, only
those types developed from the Rumpler C IV of the Rum
pler factories and which at the last were furnish e d with high altitude engines, held their O'vVIl. The last of thi s series vvas the very promising Rumpler C X (Fig . 11).
W
ith the Cl-airplane s, a cross bet we en the C and D-airplanes,
special, stress ViaS laid upon effective a rmament and climbing power, and the following types should be mentioned, in addition to
the types of the Halberstadter Airplane W
orks , the Hannover C IV
(Fig. 12) of the Hannover W gg onfaorik, and the metal a irplane
a
Junker C II of the Junkers-Fokker W
orks (Fig. 13), the latter
being characterized by lack of wing braCing and less weight.
The fundamental investigations of Duralumin airplane construction
by the Junkers Research Station ar e proving useful for present
day passenger airplane construction. Similar investigations i~re
conducted at the Zeppelin Works in Lin~au> where Dornier himself
used metal rods for airplane construction.
If the use of lightweight metal is more wide - spread in Germa ny than elsewhere, the
credit is due to both of the se Research Stations.
Fig. 14 sho w th e alternating of the C-air planes a.t the
s
front.
The chart sho ws the large num
bers of 150/160 h.p. airplanes in the second and t hird years of the war; t he most important types were: Albatros, LVG , Aviat i k, Rumpler, RolaIld, a nd

- 19 AGO airplanes. The Rumpler CI of the Rumpler Wer ke and its reproductions by other companies, held its o v the longest at the
m
front, as also did the Albatros CV with 220 h.p. geared motor.
The 860 h.p, airplanes appear in the middle of t l:8 third y ear,
,
the S8 be ing the most succe ssful construct ions of "C he Rumpler Works.
The pursuit airplane was only developed into a s e rviceable
weapon w
hen the machine gun ~as synchronized by me ans of the engine.* Figs. 15 and 16 show the type which became knovm through
Boelcke, Fokker E II I of the F'olcker-Fll.1gzeugwerke. A cam has been
connect ed to the 160 h.p. 14-cylind0r rotary eng ~ne of the OberUrsel M
otor Factory, the ca.m operating the t rigger rods of the
three 1i1 achine guns. The cams lock the guns as soon as the blades
of the propeller are , in front of their muzzles . The monoplanes
were later abandoned on account of l;heir obstructed field of vision and insufficient flying properties) in favor of the biplanes
with stationary engines. The upper wing was placed so that its
chord if lengthened would be level with the eyes of the pilot
(see Fig . 17 - Albatros DV of the Albatros Co.). In this airplane
the upward and forward view' was improved.
Only the lo v
ler wing
still presented an o·ostruction. The latter was, ho w e r, not so
ev
wide as the upper wing and set with slight backward stagger.
By bending his head slightly the pilot v~s able to sight b oth
right and left cachine guns and in spite of being strapped in was
able to overc~~e any jamming of the machine guns that might occur.
In the Pfalz D 111& (Fig. 1 6 ), is to be seen the clear direct view upon which Rittmeister von Richthofen l ~ id sucb stress.
The Fokker airplane) the Fokker D VII (Fig. 19), rJith the Bm'iv
IlIa engine of the Bavarian Motor works was the ffiOSt valuable type
of pursuit airplane at the time the war ended and for this reason had to be surrendered.
The triplane (Fok~er Dr I) of the Fokker Airplane Works (Fig .

20) with a 110 h.p. La Rhone engine v~s also valued as a pursuit
airplane on ~ccount of its good flying properties. The wings pad

an uninterrupted span .nth single wing beams and were internally
braced, but v~re connected by struts in orde r to reduce vibration. The triplane was give n due consideration theoretically and
pra.ctically) as it 'n as hoped that it v
70uld be structurally lighter
with an e~ual or superior flying efficiency. Nevert~eless, the
biplane was retained as it is infe rior to the triplane only in
the ability to turn quickly and easily . With heavy airplanes the
idea of diminishing the span by adding a third pair of wings was
* The services or' l!'"'okker in "G h is development are "v ell known. The
.
patent for the synchl"Oni zation gear belo:i1gs to the L;-V.G. O'ompany, and that for t~e fixed machine gun to August Euler.

- 20 -

very t~mpt ing , but comparative calculations have shown that triplanes are only economical when they are made with the E
·ame span
as biplanes.
Fig. 21 shows the nurr,ber of pursuit airplanes at the front.
The G-airplanes which at the last had two 260 h.p. engines, were
especially const~cted as bombing airplanes. A ~e ll known developme nt is the Go GIV (Fig. 22), of the Gothaer \1aggonfabrik. The
armament served less for attack than for defense) and v{as chiefly towards the rear.
In order to limit the range left uncovered
by the fire of the r,;achine gun, the fuselage was slit lengthwise)
E\.nd in thi s w a gun tunnel (F ig. 23) was made through which
ay
the adve rsary, when hidden under the tail surfaces, might be fired
a t from the upper machine gun stand. The influence of this gun
tunnel on the speed .of the airplane, was mode rate. The bombs
were suspended in rows under the fuselage, and it is true that
their suspension increased the air resistance. The bow of the
fuselage was executed in a fr68 curve and afforded the observer
a clear view. To the left, behind him sat the pilot with his instrum~nts.
The observer could retreat to an emergency seat to
the rIght of the pilot in case of a dangerous landing. Behind
this sat the machine gunner. The seats of the observer, machine
gunner and pilot were connected by a passage ~ay.
The Gothaer W
aggonfabrik and the Flug'z eugbau Friedrichshafen
built their G-airplanes with pusher propellers . In this position
the propellers were exposed to grea.t danger by reason of stones
flung up by the landing gear cr engine parts that might become
loose. For their AEG G IV (Fig . 24) the AEG Company therefore
used tractor propellers, and the fuselage and wings, as in all
the AEG airpla.nes, were constructed with steel tubing.
In the
switch installation in front of the pilot, as sho\ffi in Fig. 25,
all the switches are connect ed in a model way so that only very
little manipulation is necessary for operation.
The Fdh G III of the Flugzeugbau Friedrichshafen, whi ch had
been tr ied out and which had he ld it s own succe ssfully, V\'8.S similar to the Go G IV with regard to external measurements, and
also possessed the advantages of being well arranged for taking
~patt lor transportation by railroad, as the front and rear sections of the fuselage could be separated from the central main
section. The shock absorbing gear, as well as the main undercarriage (Fig . 26) we re examples of novel construction.
.
In the G-airplanes the fuel vms placed either laterally under the engines or in the main body. Neither place offers sufficient security against fire.
An improvement in this connect ion involve s much il1rportant ·\-Jorl:.
Fig. 27 sho w the number of
s
G-airplanes at the front.

------

~-

- - - --

-

,", "

-

G~

-

The Junker J1 of Junkers We rke car r ied about 400 kg . of 5 mm.
steel armor and was protected against gun fire also by the internal bracing of the wings. The eng ine, fuel tank s and ocoupants
w
ere protected by the armor (Fig. 28).
The N (n ight ) airpla nes were built with g re a t carrying capacity but with little climb and w
ere slow. Therefore J they w
ere not
in favor at the front out will be able to serve as a construction
example of transpor tation airplanes.
STRUCTURAL PART S.
Almost all the structural parts of the airplane depart from
the rules of other technique, in consequence of the building mat erial be ing necessarily cho sen with refe rence to elasticity,
strength, weight, workability, obtainability and resistance to
the ~eather and with r eference to the special o~er ational requirements. The t endencies of aut omobile, b icycle and y acht const ruction can s till be traced. Building mat erials, such as w
ood
of all Val' i et ie s] linen, canve.ss, cel l on, case in glue , ','Velding
and cold-rolled sheet steel, medium and Righ tensile steels, aluminum and its alloys, etc, , are employed in places w
here the
technique of construction is important, and w
here the properties
of these mat erials m
ust be made to harmonize vvith one another.
As the life of the airplanes during the war wro.s brief, lasting Only a fe w months, it wa s for the most part, not ne cessary to take
account of aging,
Wit h the coming of transportation air planes,
this will, however, have to be most carefully observed.
The rib s (Fig . 29) wh ich , after the doped linen, are the most
important carrying feature of a wing , are manifold in shape. The
form of the ribs gives to the wing its prescr ibed ae rodynamic
cross- sect ion. Sol id ribs, when narro w, are as shown by expe riments, equa.l t o t he hollowed out ones in w
eight, but are cheaper
to ma ke. The fastening of the rib s to the wing beams requires
great care and is d ifficult, as the wing beams m
ust be as high as
p os sible, and the thi ckne ss of the rib capp ing strip therefore
must necessarily be small. The construction of the wing beams
also has been extensively developed, They consist of several
parts g lued to get~er as shown in Fig, 30, Great expe rience is
n3cessary for the distribution of surface s glued length wise and
c ro.'3s ·,' iise ., and f or a r ranging the layers of the laminat ed viOod in
such a way that t he cross-s e ct ions of the same a re not only strong
but we atherproof, The me tal wing fit tings (Fig , 31), m
ust weigh
as little as possible , must be j oined to the wings as smoot hly
as possible and m
ust not necessitate eccentric braoing connections . At the body, the connections m
ust be ea sy to loosen (co~­
pare Ko. 4) , a device of t he Rumpler C-airplanes. The arrangement

- Z2 for transposition, (compare No. 1 ) (A1b CIII), is also advantageous for learning to fly. Mountings for the steel tube wing beams
were al",o designed by the AEG (compare No .8 ) . The characteristic
wing suspension of the RU'_D' I of the Rumpler Werke (Fig . 32)
unites the main carrying wires of the lower wing below the frame
of the fuselage and in this -.rvay le ssens the weight of the mounted
parts to a minimum.
The lack of raVl rubber made it necessary to do 7ithout tl1e
light rubber shock absorbers of the undercarriages and to use instead spiral springs laid one inside the other in the same way as
the wound rubber cords. Realizing that springs made of thin vvire
are lighter, the AEG designed ~ very serviceable spring (F ig. 33).
The top and bottom of the springs, w
hich m~y easily be c hanged,
are hooked into staples which are connected with the axle and with
the undercarriage.
COMPARISON OF THE PERFORMANCES .

The old 100 h.p, B-airplanes require 46 min. to _attain an
altitude of 3 km.; the 150,160 h.p. C-airplanes require only _
about
26 min. - The fact must be accentuatod that the latest 260 h. p. C:'"
airplanes fitted with high altitude engines, attain an altitude of
6 km. in abou~ 42 min. , while an up-t o-date pursuit airplane climbs
7 km. in about 26 min . It weighs about 820 kg. , ~nd the average
climbing speed is:
w ==

7000
26.60

==

4.5 meters per sec.

The average lifting capacity is accordingly
N -'

820_4.5
'75

49 h.p.

wi t h an average engine output of 150 h . p . Therefore, the energy
expended on the lift is about 1/'3 > a high figure w
hen remerr.bering
that the propeller alone has an efficiency of 70%, therefore that
an allowance of about 56 h.P. must be made for the carrying of the
airplane itself.
I

The continuous lines sho ~n - i n illustrations 34 to 37 give the
measured altitudes, and the broken lines give the extrapolated altitudes. For the airplanes --lith high altitude engine s, the curves
'
were also extrapolated do vvn v
vards, as the high altitude engines do
t
::lot attain their maximum ou_tpu_ at the ground. The airplanes with
high altitude e:!1gines 1
iTould, according to tnis, save a few more
~inutes on the cli~b W
itL the t h rottle s wide open.

- 23 -

The efficiency load (
Total weight of airnlane
)
theoretical engine output at the ground
of the military airplanes is far too lo w for profitable ae rial
traffic . As quick climbing ability and high ceilings are of little
imp ortance for transp ortation airplanes w may look for an ine
crease in the effici e ncy load up to the limit practicable for safe
starting and l anding.
Fig. 38 sho ws the altitude limits of the German airplanes in
1 918.

We draw attention to the th ree altitudes connected with the

various tasks . The pursuit airplanes circled at the h ighest altit ude in order t o prot e ct the working airplanes . Be lo w tbe latter
we re the infantry airplanes aiding the battle on the ground .

(Translated by the Office of Naval Intell igence, Navy ". D~partment ,
Washington , D. C. )

• '1.-

